*Pudd’nhead Wilson* by Mark Twain


## A Whisper to the Reader


> There is no character, howsoever good and fine, but it can be destroyed by ridicule, howsoever poor and witless. Observe the ass, for instance: his character is about perfect, he is the choicest spirit among all the humbler animals, yet see what ridicule has brought him to. Instead of feeling complimented when we are called an ass, we are left in doubt. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


A person who is ignorant of legal matters is always liable to make mistakes when he tries to photograph a court scene with his pen; and so I was not willing to let the law chapters in this book go to press without first subjecting them to rigid and exhausting revision and correction by a trained barrister—if that is what they are called.


These chapters are right, now, in every detail, for they were rewritten under the immediate eye of William Hicks, who studied law part of a while in southwest Missouri thirty-five years ago and then came over here to Florence for his health and is still helping for exercise and board in Macaroni Vermicelli’s horse-feed shed which is up the back alley as you turn around the corner out of the Piazza del Duomo just beyond the house where that stone that Dante used to sit on six hundred years ago is let into the wall when he let on to be watching them build Giotto’s campanile and yet always got tired looking as soon as Beatrice passed along on her way to get a chunk of chestnut cake to defend herself with in case of a Ghibelline outbreak before she got to school, at the same old stand where they sell the same old cake to this day and it is just as light and good as it was then, too, and this is not flattery, far from it.


He was a little rusty on his law, but he rubbed up for this book, and those two or three legal chapters are right and straight, now. He told me so himself.


Given under my hand this second day of January, 1893, at the Villa Viviani, village of Settignano, three miles back of Florence, on the hills—the same certainly affording the most charming view to be found on this planet, and with it the most dreamlike and enchanting sunsets to be found in any planet or even in any solar system—and given, too, in the swell room of the house, with the busts of Cerretani senators and other grandees of this line looking approvingly down upon me as they used to look down upon Dante, and mutely asking me to adopt them into my family, which I do with pleasure, for my remotest ancestors are but spring chickens compared with these robed and stately antiques, and it will be a great and satisfying lift for me, that six hundred years will.


Mark Twain.


## I. Pudd’nhead Wins His Name


> Tell the truth or trump﻿—but get the trick. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


The scene of this chronicle is the town of Dawson’s Landing, on the Missouri side of the Mississippi, half a day’s journey, per steamboat, below St. Louis.


In 1830 it was a snug little collection of modest one- and two-story frame dwellings whose whitewashed exteriors were almost concealed from sight by climbing tangles of rose-vines, honeysuckles, and morning-glories.


Each of these pretty homes had a garden in front fenced with white palings and opulently stocked with hollyhocks, marigolds, touch-me-nots, prince’s-feathers and other old-fashioned flowers; while on the windowsills of the houses stood wooden boxes containing moss-rose plants and terra-cotta pots in which grew a breed of geranium whose spread of intensely red blossoms accented the prevailing pink tint of the rose-clad house-front like an explosion of flame.


When there was room on the ledge outside of the pots and boxes for a cat, the cat was there﻿—in sunny weather﻿—stretched at full length, asleep and blissful, with her furry belly to the sun and a paw curved over her nose.


Then that house was complete, and its contentment and peace were made manifest to the world by this symbol, whose testimony is infallible.


A home without a cat﻿—and a well-fed, well-petted and properly revered cat﻿—may be a perfect home, perhaps, but how can it prove title?


All along the streets, on both sides, at the outer edge of the brick sidewalks, stood locust-trees with trunks protected by wooden boxing, and these furnished shade for summer and a sweet fragrance in spring when the clusters of buds came forth.


The main street, one block back from the river, and running parallel with it, was the sole business street.


It was six blocks long, and in each block two or three brick stores three stories high towered above interjected bunches of little frame shops.


Swinging signs creaked in the wind, the street’s whole length.


The candy-striped pole which indicates nobility proud and ancient along the palace-bordered canals of Venice, indicated merely the humble barber shop along the main street of Dawson’s Landing.


On a chief corner stood a lofty unpainted pole wreathed from top to bottom with tin pots and pans and cups, the chief tinmonger’s noisy notice to the world (when the wind blew) that his shop was on hand for business at that corner.


The hamlet’s front was washed by the clear waters of the great river; its body stretched itself rearward up a gentle incline; its most rearward border fringed itself out and scattered its houses about the baseline of the hills; the hills rose high, enclosing the town in a half-moon curve, clothed with forests from foot to summit.


Steamboats passed up and down every hour or so. Those belonging to the little Cairo line and the little Memphis line always stopped; the big Orleans liners stopped for hails only, or to land passengers or freight; and this was the case also with the great flotilla of “transients.”


These latter came out of a dozen rivers﻿—the Illinois, the Missouri, the Upper Mississippi, the Ohio, the Monongahela, the Tennessee, the Red River, the White River, and so on; and were bound every whither and stocked with every imaginable comfort or necessity which the Mississippi’s communities could want, from the frosty Falls of St. Anthony down through nine climates to torrid New Orleans.


Dawson’s Landing was a slaveholding town, with a rich slave-worked grain and pork country back of it.


The town was sleepy and comfortable and contented. It was fifty years old, and was growing slowly﻿—very slowly, in fact, but still it was growing.


The chief citizen was York Leicester Driscoll, about forty years old, judge of the county court.
n:york=Judge Driscoll;e:york=serious

He was very proud of his old Virginian ancestry, and in his hospitalities and his rather formal and stately manners he kept up its traditions.


He was fine and just and generous. To be a gentleman﻿—a gentleman without stain or blemish﻿—was his only religion, and to it he was always faithful.


He was respected, esteemed and beloved by all the community.


He was well off, and was gradually adding to his store.


He and his wife were very nearly happy, but not quite, for they had no children. The longing for the treasure of a child had grown stronger and stronger as the years slipped away, but the blessing never came﻿—and was never to come.
e:york=unhappy

With this pair lived the Judge’s widowed sister, Mrs. Rachel Pratt, and she also was childless﻿—childless, and sorrowful for that reason, and not to be comforted.
n:rachel=Mrs. Rachel Pratt;e:rachel=unhappy

The women were good and commonplace people, and did their duty and had their reward in clear consciences and the community’s approbation.
e:rachel=neutral

They were Presbyterians, the Judge was a freethinker.


Pembroke Howard, lawyer and bachelor, aged about forty, was another old Virginian grandee with proved descent from the First Families.
n:pembroke=Pembroke Howard;e:pembroke=serious

He was a fine, brave, majestic creature, a gentleman according to the nicest requirements of the Virginia rule, a devoted Presbyterian, an authority on the “code,” and a man always courteously ready to stand up before you in the field if any act or word of his had seemed doubtful or suspicious to you, and explain it with any weapon you might prefer from bradawls to artillery.


He was very popular with the people, and was the Judge’s dearest friend.


Then there was Colonel Cecil Burleigh Essex, another F.F.V. of formidable caliber﻿—however, with him we have no concern.


Percy Northumberland Driscoll, brother to the Judge, and younger than he by five years, was a married man, and had had children around his hearthstone; but they were attacked in detail by measles, croup and scarlet fever, and this had given the doctor a chance with his effective antediluvian methods; so the cradles were empty.
n:percy=Percy Northumberland Driscoll;e:percy=unhappy

He was a prosperous man, with a good head for speculations, and his fortune was growing.
e:percy=neutral

On the 1st of February, 1830, two boy babes were born in his house: one to him, the other to one of his slave girls, Roxana by name.
n:roxana=Roxana;e:roxana=neutral

Roxana was twenty years old. She was up and around the same day, with her hands full, for she was tending both babies.


Mrs. Percy Driscoll died within the week. Roxy remained in charge of the children.


She had her own way, for Mr. Driscoll soon absorbed himself in his speculations and left her to her own devices.
e:percy=thinking

In that same month of February, Dawson’s Landing gained a new citizen.


This was Mr. David Wilson, a young fellow of Scotch parentage.
n:wilson=Mr. David Wilson;e:wilson=neutral

He had wandered to this remote region from his birthplace in the interior of the State of New York, to seek his fortune.


He was twenty-five years old, college-bred, and had finished a post-college course in an Eastern law school a couple of years before.


He was a homely, freckled, sandy-haired young fellow, with an intelligent blue eye that had frankness and comradeship in it and a covert twinkle of a pleasant sort.
e:wilson=smirking

But for an unfortunate remark of his, he would no doubt have entered at once upon a successful career at Dawson’s Landing.


But he made his fatal remark the first day he spent in the village, and it “gaged” him.


He had just made the acquaintance of a group of citizens when an invisible dog began to yelp and snarl and howl and make himself very comprehensively disagreeable, whereupon young Wilson said, much as one who is thinking aloud﻿—
e:wilson=thinking

“I wish I owned half of that dog.”
s=wilson

“Why?” somebody asked.
n:cit1=Citizen;s=cit1;e:cit1=confused

“Because I would kill my half.”
s=wilson;e:wilson=neutral

The group searched his face with curiosity, with anxiety even, but found no light there, no expression that they could read.
s=none;e:cit1=confused

They fell away from him as from something uncanny, and went into privacy to discuss him.
e:wilson=neutral

One said:


“ ’Pears to be a fool.”
s=cit1;e:cit1=scowling

“ ’Pears?” said another. “*Is,* I reckon you better say.”
n:cit2=Citizen 2;s=cit2

“Said he wished he owned *half* of the dog, the idiot,” said a third.
n:cit3=Citizen 3;s=cit3;e:cit3=serious

“What did he reckon would become of the other half if he killed his half? Do you reckon he thought it would live?”
e:cit3=scowling

“Why, he must have thought it, unless he *is* the downrightest fool in the world; because if he hadn’t thought it, he would have wanted to own the whole dog, knowing that if he killed his half and the other half died, he would be responsible for that half just the same as if he had killed that half instead of his own. Don’t it look that way to you, gents?”
s=cit1

“Yes, it does. If he owned one half of the general dog, it would be so; if he owned one end of the dog and another person owned the other end, it would be so, just the same; particularly in the first case, because if you kill one half of a general dog, there ain’t any man that can tell whose half it was, but if he owned one end of the dog, maybe he could kill his end of it and﻿—”
s=cit1

“No, he couldn’t either; he couldn’t and not be responsible if the other end died, which it would. In my opinion the man ain’t in his right mind.”
s=cit2

“In my opinion he hain’t *got* any mind.”
s=cit1

No. 3 said: “Well, he’s a lummox, anyway.”
s=cit3

“That’s what he is,” said No. 4, “he’s a labrick﻿—just a Simon-pure labrick, if ever there was one.”
n:cit4=Citizen 4;s=cit4

“Yes, sir, he’s a dam fool, that’s the way I put him up,” said No. 5. “Anybody can think different that wants to, but those are my sentiments.”
n:cit5=Citizen 5;s=cit5

“I’m with you, gentlemen,” said No. 6. “Perfect jackass﻿—yes, and it ain’t going too far to say he is a pudd’nhead. If he ain’t a pudd’nhead, I ain’t no judge, that’s all.”
n:cit6=Citizen 6;s=cit6

Mr. Wilson stood elected. The incident was told all over the town, and gravely discussed by everybody.
s=none

Within a week he had lost his first name; Pudd’nhead took its place.
n:wilson=David “Pudd’nhead” Wilson

In time he came to be liked, and well liked too; but by that time the nickname had got well stuck on, and it stayed.


That first day’s verdict made him a fool, and he was not able to get it set aside, or even modified.


The nickname soon ceased to carry any harsh or unfriendly feeling with it, but it held its place, and was to continue to hold its place for twenty long years.


## II. Driscoll Spares His Slaves


> Adam was but human﻿—this explains it all. He did not want the apple for the apple’s sake, he wanted it only because it was forbidden. The mistake was in not forbidding the serpent; then he would have eaten the serpent. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


Pudd’nhead Wilson had a trifle of money when he arrived, and he bought a small house on the extreme western verge of the town.
e:wilson=neutral

Between it and Judge Driscoll’s house there was only a grassy yard, with a paling fence dividing the properties in the middle.


He hired a small office down in the town and hung out a tin sign with these words on it:


> David Wilson.


> Attorney And Counselor-At-Law.


> Surveying, Conveyancing, Etc.


But his deadly remark had ruined his chance﻿—at least in the law.
e:wilson=unhappy

No clients came. He took down his sign, after a while, and put it up on his own house with the law features knocked out of it.


It offered his services now in the humble capacities of land-surveyor and expert accountant.


Now and then he got a job of surveying to do, and now and then a merchant got him to straighten out his books.


With Scotch patience and pluck he resolved to live down his reputation and work his way into the legal field yet.
e:wilson=serious

Poor fellow, he could not foresee that it was going to take him such a weary long time to do it.


He had a rich abundance of idle time, but it never hung heavy on his hands, for he interested himself in every new thing that was born into the universe of ideas, and studied it and experimented upon it at his house.
e:wilson=thinking

One of his pet fads was palmistry. To another one he gave no name, neither would he explain to anybody what its purpose was, but merely said it was an amusement.


In fact he had found that his fads added to his reputation as a pudd’nhead; therefore he was growing chary of being too communicative about them.


The fad without a name was one which dealt with people’s fingermarks.


He carried in his coat pocket a shallow box with grooves in it, and in the grooves strips of glass five inches long and three inches wide.


Along the lower edge of each strip was pasted a slip of white paper.


He asked people to pass their hands through their hair (thus collecting upon them a thin coating of the natural oil) and then make a thumbmark on a glass strip, following it with the mark of the ball of each finger in succession.


Under this row of faint grease-prints he would write a record on the strip of white paper﻿—thus:


> **John Smith**, *right hand*﻿—


and add the day of the month and the year, then take Smith’s left hand on another glass strip, and add name and date and the words “left hand.”


The strips were now returned to the grooved box, and took their place among what Wilson called his “records.”


He often studied his records, examining and poring over them with absorbing interest until far into the night; but what he found there﻿—if he found anything﻿—he revealed to no one.


Sometimes he copied on paper the involved and delicate pattern left by the ball of a finger, and then vastly enlarged it with a pantograph so that he could examine its web of curving lines with ease and convenience.


One sweltering afternoon﻿—it was the first day of July, 1830﻿—he was at work over a set of tangled account-books in his workroom, which looked westward over a stretch of vacant lots, when a conversation outside disturbed him.
e:wilson=weary

It was carried on in yells, which showed that the people engaged in it were not close together:


“Say, Roxy, how does yo’ baby come on?”
n:jasper=Jasper;s=jasper;e:jasper=happy

This from the distant voice.
s=none

“Fust-rate; how does *you* come on, Jasper?” This yell was from close by.
s=roxana;e:roxana=happy

“Oh, I’s middlin’; hain’t got noth’n’ to complain of. I’s gwine to come a-court’n’ you bimeby, Roxy.”
s=jasper;e:jasper=smirking

“*You* is, you black mudcat! Yah﻿—yah﻿—yah! I got somep’n’ better to do den ’sociat’n’ wid niggers as black as you is. Is ole Miss Cooper’s Nancy done give you de mitten?”
s=roxana;e:roxana=smirking

Roxy followed this sally with another discharge of carefree laughter.
s=none;e:roxana=happy

“You’s jealous, Roxy, dat’s what’s de matter wid *you*, you hussy﻿—yah﻿—yah﻿—yah! Dat’s de time I got you!”
s=jasper;e:jasper=happy

“Oh, yes, *you* got me, hain’t you. ’Clah to goodness if dat conceit o’ yo’n strikes in, Jasper, it gwine to kill you sho’.”
s=roxana;e:roxana=smirking

“If you b’longed to me I’d sell you down de river ’fo’ you git too fur gone. Fust time I runs acrost yo’ marster, I’s gwine to tell him so.”


This idle and aimless jabber went on and on, both parties enjoying the friendly duel and each well satisfied with his own share of the wit exchanged﻿—for wit they considered it.
s=none

Wilson stepped to the window to observe the combatants; he could not work while their chatter continued.
e:wilson=thinking

Over in the vacant lots was Jasper, young, coal-black and of magnificent build, sitting on a wheelbarrow in the pelting sun﻿—at work, supposably, whereas he was in fact only preparing for it by taking an hour’s rest before beginning.


In front of Wilson’s porch stood Roxy, with a local handmade baby-wagon, in which sat her two charges﻿—one at each end and facing each other.


From Roxy’s manner of speech, a stranger would have expected her to be black, but she was not.
e:roxana=neutral

Only one sixteenth of her was black, and that sixteenth did not show.


She was of majestic form and stature, her attitudes were imposing and statuesque, and her gestures and movements distinguished by a noble and stately grace.


Her complexion was very fair, with the rosy glow of vigorous health in the cheeks, her face was full of character and expression, her eyes were brown and liquid, and she had a heavy suit of fine soft hair which was also brown, but the fact was not apparent because her head was bound about with a checkered handkerchief and the hair was concealed under it.


Her face was shapely, intelligent and comely﻿—even beautiful. She had an easy, independent carriage﻿—when she was among her own caste﻿—and a high and “sassy” way, withal; but of course she was meek and humble enough where white people were.


To all intents and purposes Roxy was as white as anybody, but the one sixteenth of her which was black outvoted the other fifteen parts and made her a Negro.


She was a slave, and salable as such. Her child was thirty-one parts white, and he, too, was a slave, and by a fiction of law and custom a Negro.


He had blue eyes and flaxen curls like his white comrade, but even the father of the white child was able to tell the children apart﻿—little as he had commerce with them﻿—by their clothes: for the white babe wore ruffled soft muslin and a coral necklace, while the other wore merely a coarse tow-linen shirt which barely reached to its knees, and no jewelry.


The white child’s name was Thomas à Becket Driscoll, the other’s name was Valet de Chambre: no surname﻿—slaves hadn’t the privilege.


Roxana had heard that phrase somewhere, the fine sound of it had pleased her ear, and as she had supposed it was a name, she loaded it on to her darling.


It soon got shorted to “Chambers,” of course.


Wilson knew Roxy by sight, and when the duel of wit began to play out, he stepped outside to gather in a record or two.


Jasper went to work energetically, at once, perceiving that his leisure was observed.


Wilson inspected the children and asked﻿—


“How old are they, Roxy?”
s=wilson;e:wilson=neutral

“Bofe de same age, sir﻿—five months. Bawn de fust o’ Feb’uary.”
s=roxana

“They’re handsome little chaps. One’s just as handsome as the other, too.”
s=wilson;e:wilson=happy

A delighted smile exposed the girl’s white teeth, and she said:
s=none;e:roxana=happy

“Bless yo’ soul, Misto Wilson, it’s pow’ful nice o’ you to say dat, ’ca’se one of ’em ain’t on’y a nigger. Mighty prime little nigger, *I* al’ays says, but dat’s ca’se it’s mine, o’ course.”
s=roxana

“How do you tell them apart, Roxy, when they haven’t any clothes on?”
s=wilson;e:wilson=thinking

Roxy laughed a laugh proportioned to her size, and said:
s=none;e:roxana=happy

“Oh, *I* kin tell ’em ’part, Misto Wilson, but I bet Marse Percy couldn’t, not to save his life.”
s=roxana;e:roxana=smirking

Wilson chatted along for awhile, and presently got Roxy’s fingerprints for his collection﻿—right hand and left﻿—on a couple of his glass strips; then labeled and dated them, and took the “records” of both children, and labeled and dated them also.
s=none;e:wilson=neutral

Two months later, on the 3rd of September, he took this trio of fingermarks again.


He liked to have a “series,” two or three “takings” at intervals during the period of childhood, these to be followed by others at intervals of several years.


The next day﻿—that is to say, on the 4th of September﻿—something occurred which profoundly impressed Roxana.
e:roxana=fearful

Mr. Driscoll missed another small sum of money﻿—which is a way of saying that this was not a new thing, but had happened before.
n:percy=Percy Driscoll;e:percy=unhappy

In truth it had happened three times before. Driscoll’s patience was exhausted.
e:percy=angry

He was a fairly humane man toward slaves and other animals; he was an exceedingly humane man toward the erring of his own race.


Theft he could not abide, and plainly there was a thief in his house.


Necessarily the thief must be one of his Negroes. Sharp measures must be taken. He called his servants before him.


There were three of these, besides Roxy: a man, a woman, and a boy twelve years old.
n:servant1=Servant;n:servant2=Servant;n:servant3=Servant;e:servant1=fearful;e:servant2=fearful;e:servant3=fearful

They were not related. Mr. Driscoll said:


“You have all been warned before. It has done no good. This time I will teach you a lesson. I will sell the thief. Which of you is the guilty one?”
s=percy

They all shuddered at the threat, for here they had a good home, and a new one was likely to be a change for the worse.
s=none

The denial was general. None had stolen anything﻿—not money, anyway﻿—a little sugar, or cake, or honey, or something like that, that “Marse Percy wouldn’t mind or miss,” but not money﻿—never a cent of money.


They were eloquent in their protestations, but Mr. Driscoll was not moved by them.


He answered each in turn with a stern “Name the thief!”


The truth was, all were guilty but Roxana; she suspected that the others were guilty, but she did not know them to be so.


She was horrified to think how near she had come to being guilty herself; she had been saved in the nick of time by a revival in the colored Methodist Church, a fortnight before, at which time and place she “got religion.”
e:roxana=fearful

The very next day after that gracious experience, while her change of style was fresh upon her and she was vain of her purified condition, her master left a couple dollars lying unprotected on his desk, and she happened upon that temptation when she was polishing around with a dust-rag.


She looked at the money awhile with a steady rising resentment, then she burst out with﻿—
e:roxana=angry

“Dad blame dat revival, I wisht it had ’a’ be’n put off till tomorrow!”
s=roxana

Then she covered the tempter with a book, and another member of the kitchen cabinet got it.
s=none

She made this sacrifice as a matter of religious etiquette; as a thing necessary just now, but by no means to be wrested into a precedent; no, a week or two would limber up her piety, then she would be rational again, and the next two dollars that got left out in the cold would find a comforter﻿—and she could name the comforter.
e:roxana=neutral

Was she bad? Was she worse than the general run of her race?


No. They had an unfair show in the battle of life, and they held it no sin to take military advantage of the enemy﻿—in a small way; in a small way, but not in a large one.


They would smouch provisions from the pantry whenever they got a chance; or a brass thimble, or a cake of wax, or an emery-bag, or a paper of needles, or a silver spoon, or a dollar bill, or small articles of clothing, or any other property of light value; and so far were they from considering such reprisals sinful, that they would go to church and shout and pray the loudest and sincerest with their plunder in their pockets.


A farm smokehouse had to be kept heavily padlocked, for even the colored deacon himself could not resist a ham when Providence showed him in a dream, or otherwise, where such a thing hung lonesome and longed for someone to love.


But with a hundred hanging before him the deacon would not take two﻿—that is, on the same night.


On frosty nights the humane Negro prowler would warm the end of a plank and put it up under the cold claws of chickens roosting in a tree; a drowsy hen would step on to the comfortable board, softly clucking her gratitude, and the prowler would dump her into his bag, and later into his stomach, perfectly sure that in taking this trifle from the man who daily robbed him of an inestimable treasure﻿—his liberty﻿—he was not committing any sin that God would remember against him in the Last Great Day.


“Name the thief!”
s=percy

For the fourth time Mr. Driscoll had said it, and always in the same hard tone.
s=none

And now he added these words of awful import:


“I give you one minute”﻿—he took out his watch.
s=percy

“If at the end of that time you have not confessed, I will not only sell all four of you, *but*﻿—I will sell you **down the river**!”


It was equivalent to condemning them to hell! No Missouri Negro doubted this.
s=none

Roxy reeled in her tracks and the color vanished out of her face; the others dropped to their knees as if they had been shot; tears gushed from their eyes, their supplicating hands went up, and three answers came in the one instant:
e:roxana=fearful;e:servant1=crying;e:servant2=crying;e:servant3=crying

“I done it!”
s=servant1

“I done it!”
s=servant2

“I done it!﻿—have mercy, marster﻿—Lord have mercy on us po’ niggers!”
s=servant3

“Very good,” said the master, putting up his watch, “I will sell you *here* though you don’t deserve it. You ought to be sold down the river.”
s=percy;e:percy=serious

The culprits flung themselves prone, in an ecstasy of gratitude, and kissed his feet, declaring that they would never forget his goodness and never cease to pray for him as long as they lived.
s=none

They were sincere, for like a god he had stretched forth his mighty hand and closed the gates of hell against them.


He knew, himself, that he had done a noble and gracious thing, and was privately well pleased with his magnanimity; and that night he set the incident down in his diary, so that his son might read it in after years, and be thereby moved to deeds of gentleness and humanity himself.
e:percy=happy

## III. Roxy Plays a Shrewd Trick


> Whoever has lived long enough to find out what life is, knows how deep a debt of gratitude we owe to Adam, the first great benefactor of our race. He brought death into the world. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


Percy Driscoll slept well the night he saved his house-minions from going down the river, but no wink of sleep visited Roxy’s eyes.
e:roxana=fearful

A profound terror had taken possession of her. Her child could grow up and be sold down the river!
e:roxana=fearful

The thought crazed her with horror.
e:roxana=fearful

If she dozed and lost herself for a moment, the next moment she was on her feet flying to her child’s cradle to see if it was still there.


Then she would gather it to her heart and pour out her love upon it in a frenzy of kisses, moaning, crying, and saying, “Dey shan’t, oh, dey *shan’t!*—yo’ po’ mammy will kill you fust!”
e:roxana=crying;s=roxana

Once, when she was tucking it back in its cradle again, the other child nestled in its sleep and attracted her attention.
s=none

She went and stood over it a long time communing with herself:
e:roxana=thinking

“What has my po’ baby done, dat he couldn’t have yo’ luck? He hain’t done noth’n’.”
s=roxana

“God was good to you; why warn’t he good to him? Dey can’t sell *you* down de river.”


“I hates yo’ pappy; he hain’t got no heart—for niggers he hain’t, anyways.”
e:roxana=angry

“I hates him, en I could kill him!”
s=roxana

She paused awhile, thinking; then she burst into wild sobbings again, and turned away, saying, “Oh, I got to kill my chile, dey ain’t no yuther way—killin’ *him* wouldn’t save de chile fum goin’ down de river.”
e:roxana=crying

“Oh, I got to do it, yo’ po’ mammy’s got to kill you to save you, honey”—she gathered her baby to her bosom, now, and began to smother it with caresses—“Mammy’s got to kill you—how *kin* I do it!”


“But yo’ mammy ain’t gwine to desert you—no, no; *dah*, don’t cry—she gwine *wid* you, she gwine to kill herself too.”
e:roxana=unhappy

“Come along, honey, come along wid mammy; we gwine to jump in de river, den de troubles o’ dis worl’ is all over—dey don’t sell po’ niggers down the river over *yonder*.”


She started toward the door, crooning to the child and hushing it; midway she stopped, suddenly.
s=none;e:roxana=surprised

She had caught sight of her new Sunday gown—a cheap curtain-calico thing, a conflagration of gaudy colors and fantastic figures.
e:roxana=neutral

She surveyed it wistfully, longingly.
e:roxana=unhappy

“Hain’t ever wore it yet,” she said, “en it’s jist lovely.”
s=roxana

Then she nodded her head in response to a pleasant idea, and added, “No, I ain’t gwine to be fished out, wid everybody lookin’ at me, in dis mis’able ole linsey-woolsey.”
e:roxana=happy

She put down the child and made the change.
s=none

She looked in the glass and was astonished at her beauty.
e:roxana=surprised

She resolved to make her death-toilet perfect.
e:roxana=serious

She took off her handkerchief-turban and dressed her glossy wealth of hair “like white folks”; she added some odds and ends of rather lurid ribbon and a spray of atrocious artificial flowers; finally she threw over her shoulders a fluffy thing called a “cloud” in that day, which was of a blazing red complexion.


Then she was ready for the tomb.


She gathered up her baby once more; but when her eye fell upon its miserably short little gray tow-linen shirt and noted the contrast between its pauper shabbiness and her own volcanic irruption of infernal splendors, her mother-heart was touched, and she was ashamed.
e:roxana=unhappy

“No, dolling, mammy ain’t gwine to treat you so.”
s=roxana

“De angels is gwine to ’mire you jist as much as dey does yo’ mammy.”


“Ain’t gwine to have ’em putt’n’ dey han’s up ’fo’ dey eyes en sayin’ to David en Goliah en dem yuther prophets, ‘Dat chile is dress’ too indelicate fo’ dis place.’ ”


By this time she had stripped off the shirt.
s=none

Now she clothed the naked little creature in one of Thomas à Becket’s snowy long baby-gowns, with its bright blue bows and dainty flummery of ruffles.


“Dah—now you’s fixed.”
s=roxana;e:roxana=happy

She propped the child in a chair and stood off to inspect it.
s=none

Straightway her eyes began to widen with astonishment and admiration, and she clapped her hands and cried out, “Why, it do beat all!—I *never* knowed you was so lovely.”
e:roxana=excited;s=roxana

“Marse Tommy ain’t a bit puttier—not a single bit.”


She stepped over and glanced at the other infant; she flung a glance back at her own; then one more at the heir of the house.
s=none;e:roxana=neutral

Now a strange light dawned in her eyes, and in a moment she was lost in thought.
e:roxana=thinking

She seemed in a trance; when she came out of it she muttered, “When I ’uz a-washin’ ’em in de tub, yistiddy, his own pappy asked me which of ’em was his’n.”
s=roxana

She began to move about like one in a dream.
s=none

She undressed Thomas à Becket, stripping him of everything, and put the tow-linen shirt on him.


She put his coral necklace on her own child’s neck.


Then she placed the children side by side, and after earnest inspection she muttered—
e:roxana=serious

“Now who would b’lieve clo’es could do de like o’ dat?”
s=roxana

“Dog my cats if it ain’t all *I* kin do to tell t’other fum which, let alone his pappy.”
s=roxana

She put her cub in Tommy’s elegant cradle and said—
s=none

“You’s young Marse *Tom* fum dis out, en I got to practise and git used to ’memberin’ to call you dat, honey, or I’s gwine to make a mistake some time en git us bofe into trouble.”
s=roxana

“Dah—now you lay still en don’t fret no mo’, Marse Tom—oh, thank de good Lord in heaven, you’s saved, you’s saved!—dey ain’t no man kin ever sell mammy’s po’ little honey down de river now!”
e:roxana=happy

She put the heir of the house in her own child’s unpainted pine cradle, and said, contemplating its slumbering form uneasily—
s=none;e:roxana=wary

“I’s sorry for you, honey; I’s sorry, God knows I is—but what *kin* I do, what *could* I do?”
s=roxana;e:roxana=unhappy

“Yo’ pappy would sell him to somebody, some time, en den he’d go down de river, sho’, en I couldn’t, couldn’t, *couldn’t* stan’ it.”


She flung herself on her bed and began to think and toss, toss and think.
s=none;e:roxana=thinking

By and by she sat suddenly upright, for a comforting thought had flown through her worried mind—
e:roxana=excited

“ ’Tain’t no sin—*white* folks has done it! It ain’t no sin, glory to goodness it ain’t no sin!”
s=roxana

“*Dey’s* done it—yes, en dey was de biggest quality in de whole bilin’, too—*kings!*”


She began to muse; she was trying to gather out of her memory the dim particulars of some tale she had heard some time or other. At last she said—
s=none;e:roxana=thinking

“Now I’s got it; now I ’member. It was dat ole nigger preacher dat tole it, de time he come over here fum Illinois en preached in de nigger church.”
s=roxana

“He said dey ain’t nobody kin save his own self—can’t do it by faith, can’t do it by works, can’t do it no way at all.”


“Free grace is de *on’y* way, en dat don’t come fum nobody but jis’ de Lord; en *he* kin give it to anybody he please, saint or sinner—*he* don’t kyer.”
e:roxana=serious

“He do jis’ as he’s a mineter. He s’lect out anybody dat suit him, en put another one in his place, and make de fust one happy forever en leave t’other one to burn wid Satan.”


“De preacher said it was jist like dey done in Englan’ one time, long time ago.”
e:roxana=thinking

“De queen she lef’ her baby layin’ aroun’ one day, en went out callin’; en one o’ de niggers roun’-’bout de place dat was ’mos’ white, she come in en see de chile layin’ aroun’, en tuck en put her own chile’s clo’es on de queen’s chile, en put de queen’s chile’s clo’es on her own chile, en den lef’ her own chile layin’ aroun’ en tuck en toted de queen’s chile home to de nigger-quarter, en nobody ever foun’ it out, en her chile was de king bimeby, en sole de queen’s chile down de river one time when dey had to settle up de estate.”


“Dah, now—de preacher said it his own self, en it ain’t no sin, ’ca’se white folks done it.”
e:roxana=neutral

“*Dey* done it—yes, *dey* done it; en not on’y jis’ common white folks nuther, but de biggest quality dey is in de whole bilin’.”


“Oh, I’s *so* glad I ’member ’bout dat!”
e:roxana=happy

She got up lighthearted and happy, and went to the cradles and spent what was left of the night “practising.”
s=none

She would give her own child a light pat and say humbly, “Lay still, Marse Tom,” then give the real Tom a pat and say with severity, “Lay *still*, Chambers!—does you want me to take somep’n’ *to* you?”


As she progressed with her practice, she was surprised to see how steadily and surely the awe which had kept her tongue reverent and her manner humble toward her young master was transferring itself to her speech and manner toward the usurper, and how similarly handy she was becoming in transferring her motherly curtness of speech and peremptoriness of manner to the unlucky heir of the ancient house of Driscoll.
s=none;e:roxana=surprised

She took occasional rests from practising, and absorbed herself in calculating her chances.
e:roxana=thinking

“Dey’ll sell dese niggers today fo’ stealin’ de money, den dey’ll buy some mo’ dat don’t know de chillen—so *dat’s* all right.”
s=roxana

“When I takes de chillen out to git de air, de minute I’s roun’ de corner I’s gwine to gaum dey mouths all roun’ wid jam, den dey can’t *nobody* notice dey’s changed.”


“Yes, I gwineter do dat till I’s safe, if it’s a year.”


“Dey ain’t but one man dat I’s afeard of, en dat’s dat Pudd’nhead Wilson.”
e:roxana=wary

“Dey calls him a pudd’nhead, en says he’s a fool. My lan’, dat man ain’t no mo’ fool den I is!”


“He’s de smartes’ man in dis town, less’n it’s Jedge Driscoll or maybe Pem Howard.”


“Blame dat man, he worries me wid dem ornery glasses o’ hisn; *I* b’lieve he’s a witch.”
e:roxana=fearful

“But nemmine, I’s gwine to happen aroun’ dah one o’ dese days en let on dat I reckon he wants to print de chillen’s fingers ag’in;”
e:roxana=thinking

“en if *he* don’t notice dey’s changed, I bound dey ain’t nobody gwine to notice it, en den I’s safe, sho’.”
e:roxana=happy

“But I reckon I’ll tote along a hoss-shoe to keep off de witch-work.”


The new Negroes gave Roxy no trouble, of course.
s=none;e:roxana=neutral

The master gave her none, for one of his speculations was in jeopardy, and his mind was so occupied that he hardly saw the children when he looked at them, and all Roxy had to do was to get them both into a gale of laughter when he came about; then their faces were mainly cavities exposing gums, and he was gone again before the spasm passed and the little creatures resumed a human aspect.


Within a few days the fate of the speculation became so dubious that Mr. Percy went away with his brother the Judge, to see what could be done with it.


It was a land speculation as usual, and it had gotten complicated with a lawsuit.


The men were gone seven weeks.


Before they got back Roxy had paid her visit to Wilson, and was satisfied.


Wilson took the fingerprints, labeled them with the names and with the date—October the first—put them carefully away and continued his chat with Roxy, who seemed very anxious that he should admire the great advance in flesh and beauty which the babies had made since he took their fingerprints a month before.
e:roxana=wary

He complimented their improvement to her contentment; and as they were without any disguise of jam or other stain, she trembled all the while and was miserably frightened lest at any moment he—
e:roxana=fearful

But he didn’t.


He discovered nothing; and she went home jubilant, and dropped all concern about the matter permanently out of her mind.
e:roxana=happy

## IV. The Ways of the Changelings


> Adam and Eve had many advantages, but the principal one was, that they escaped teething. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


> There is this trouble about special providences﻿—namely, there is so often a doubt as to which party was intended to be the beneficiary. In the case of the children, the bears and the prophet, the bears got more real satisfaction out of the episode than the prophet did, because they got the children. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


This history must henceforth accommodate itself to the change which Roxana has consummated, and call the real heir “Chambers” and the usurping little slave “Thomas à Becket”﻿—shortening this latter name to “Tom,” for daily use, as the people about him did.
n:tom=Thomas à Becket Driscoll;n:chambers=Chambers

“Tom” was a bad baby, from the very beginning of his usurpation.
e:tom=angry

He would cry for nothing; he would burst into storms of devilish temper without notice, and let go scream after scream and squall after squall, then climax the thing with “holding his breath”﻿—that frightful specialty of the teething nursling, in the throes of which the creature exhausts its lungs, then is convulsed with noiseless squirmings and twistings and kickings in the effort to get its breath, while the lips turn blue and the mouth stands wide and rigid, offering for inspection one wee tooth set in the lower rim of a hoop of red gums; and when the appalling stillness has endured until one is sure the lost breath will never return, a nurse comes flying, and dashes water in the child’s face, and﻿—presto! the lungs fill, and instantly discharge a shriek, or a yell, or a howl which bursts the listening ear and surprises the owner of it into saying words which would not go well with a halo if he had one.


The baby Tom would claw anybody who came within reach of his nails, and pound anybody he could reach with his rattle.


He would scream for water until he got it, and then throw cup and all on the floor and scream for more.


He was indulged in all his caprices, howsoever troublesome and exasperating they might be; he was allowed to eat anything he wanted, particularly things that would give him the stomachache.


When he got to be old enough to begin to toddle about and say broken words and get an idea of what his hands were for, he was a more consummate pest than ever.


Roxy got no rest while he was awake.
e:roxana=weary

He would call for anything and everything he saw, simply saying “Awnt it!” (want it), which was a command.


When it was brought, he said in a frenzy, and motioning it away with his hands, “Don’t awnt it! don’t awnt it!” and the moment it was gone he set up frantic yells of “Awnt it! awnt it! awnt it!” and Roxy had to give wings to her heels to get that thing back to him again before he could get time to carry out his intention of going into convulsions about it.
e:roxana=fearful

What he preferred above all other things was the tongs.
e:tom=happy

This was because his “father” had forbidden him to have them lest he break windows and furniture with them.


The moment Roxy’s back was turned he would toddle to the presence of the tongs and say “Like it!” and cock his eye to one side to see if Roxy was observing; then, “Awnt it!” and cock his eye again; then, “Hab it!” with another furtive glance; and finally, “Take it!”﻿—and the prize was his.
e:tom=smirking

The next moment the heavy implement was raised aloft; the next, there was a crash and a squall, and the cat was off on three legs to meet an engagement; Roxy would arrive just as the lamp or a window went to irremediable smash.
e:roxana=angry

Tom got all the petting, Chambers got none.
e:tom=neutral;e:chambers=unhappy

Tom got all the delicacies, Chambers got mush and milk, and clabber without sugar.


In consequence Tom was a sickly child and Chambers wasn’t.


Tom was “fractious,” as Roxy called it, and overbearing; Chambers was meek and docile.
e:tom=angry;e:chambers=fearful

With all her splendid common sense and practical everyday ability, Roxy was a doting fool of a mother.
e:roxana=happy

She was this toward her child﻿—and she was also more than this: by the fiction created by herself, he was become her master; the necessity of recognizing this relation outwardly and of perfecting herself in the forms required to express the recognition, had moved her to such diligence and faithfulness in practicing these forms that this exercise soon concreted itself into habit; it became automatic and unconscious; then a natural result followed: deceptions intended solely for others gradually grew practically into self-deceptions as well; the mock reverence became real reverence, the mock obsequiousness real obsequiousness, the mock homage real homage; the little counterfeit rift of separation between imitation-slave and imitation-master widened and widened, and became an abyss, and a very real one﻿—and on one side of it stood Roxy, the dupe of her own deceptions, and on the other stood her child, no longer a usurper to her, but her accepted and recognized master.


He was her darling, her master, and her deity all in one, and in her worship of him she forgot who she was and what he had been.


In babyhood Tom cuffed and banged and scratched Chambers unrebuked, and Chambers early learned that between meekly bearing it and resenting it, the advantage all lay with the former policy.
e:tom=angry;e:chambers=fearful

The few times that his persecutions had moved him beyond control and made him fight back had cost him very dear at headquarters; not at the hands of Roxy, for if she ever went beyond scolding him sharply for “forgitt’n’ who his young marster was,” she at least never extended her punishment beyond a box on the ear.
e:chambers=angry;e:roxana=angry

No, Percy Driscoll was the person. He told Chambers that under no provocation whatever was he privileged to lift his hand against his little master.
e:percy=angry

Chambers overstepped the line three times, and got three such convincing canings from the man who was his father and didn’t know it, that he took Tom’s cruelties in all humility after that, and made no more experiments.
e:chambers=fearful

Outside of the house the two boys were together all through their boyhood.
e:tom=neutral;e:chambers=neutral

Chambers was strong beyond his years, and a good fighter; strong because he was coarsely fed and hard worked about the house, and a good fighter because Tom furnished him plenty of practice﻿—on white boys whom he hated and was afraid of.


Chambers was his constant bodyguard, to and from school; he was present on the playground at recess to protect his charge.
e:chambers=serious

He fought himself into such a formidable reputation, by and by, that Tom could have changed clothes with him, and “ridden in peace,” like Sir Kay in Launcelot’s armor.


He was good at games of skill, too. Tom staked him with marbles to play “keeps” with, and then took all the winnings away from him.
e:tom=smirking

In the winter season Chambers was on hand, in Tom’s worn-out clothes, with “holy” red mittens, and “holy” shoes, and pants “holy” at the knees and seat, to drag a sled up the hill for Tom, warmly clad, to ride down on; but he never got a ride himself. He built snow men and snow fortifications under Tom’s directions.
e:chambers=weary

He was Tom’s patient target when Tom wanted to do some snowballing, but the target couldn’t fire back.
e:tom=happy

Chambers carried Tom’s skates to the river and strapped them on him, then trotted around after him on the ice, so as to be on hand when wanted; but he wasn’t ever asked to try the skates himself.


In summer the pet pastime of the boys of Dawson’s Landing was to steal apples, peaches, and melons from the farmers’ fruit-wagons﻿—mainly on account of the risk they ran of getting their heads laid open with the butt of the farmer’s whip.


Tom was a distinguished adept at these thefts﻿—by proxy. Chambers did his stealing, and got the peach-stones, apple-cores, and melon-rinds for his share.


Tom always made Chambers go in swimming with him, and stay by him as a protection.


When Tom had had enough, he would slip out and tie knots in Chambers’s shirt, dip the knots in the water and make them hard to undo, then dress himself and sit by and laugh while the naked shiverer tugged at the stubborn knots with his teeth.
e:tom=happy;e:chambers=unhappy

Tom did his humble comrade these various ill turns partly out of native viciousness, and partly because he hated him for his superiorities of physique and pluck, and for his manifold cleverness.
e:tom=angry

Tom couldn’t dive, for it gave him splitting headaches. Chambers could dive without inconvenience, and was fond of doing it.
e:chambers=happy

He excited so much admiration, one day, among a crowd of white boys, by throwing back somersaults from the stern of a canoe, that it wearied Tom’s spirit, and at last he shoved the canoe underneath Chambers while he was in the air﻿—so he came down on his head in the canoe-bottom; and while he lay unconscious, several of Tom’s ancient adversaries saw that their long-desired opportunity was come, and they gave the false heir such a drubbing that with Chambers’s best help he was hardly able to drag himself home afterward.
e:tom=angry;e:tom=unhappy

When the boys were fifteen and upward, Tom was “showing off” in the river one day, when he was taken with a cramp, and shouted for help.
e:tom=fearful

It was a common trick with the boys﻿—particularly if a stranger was present﻿—to pretend a cramp and howl for help; then when the stranger came tearing hand over hand to the rescue, the howler would go on struggling and howling till he was close at hand, then replace the howl with a sarcastic smile and swim blandly away, while the town boys assailed the dupe with a volley of jeers and laughter.


Tom had never tried this joke as yet, but was supposed to be trying it now, so the boys held warily back; but Chambers believed his master was in earnest, therefore he swam out, and arrived in time, unfortunately, and saved his life.
e:chambers=fearful

This was the last feather. Tom had managed to endure everything else, but to have to remain publicly and permanently under such an obligation as this to a nigger, and to this nigger of all niggers﻿—this was too much.
e:tom=angry

He heaped insults upon Chambers for “pretending” to think he was in earnest in calling for help, and said that anybody but a block-headed nigger would have known he was funning and left him alone.


Tom’s enemies were in strong force here, so they came out with their opinions quite freely.
e:tom=unhappy

They laughed at him, and called him coward, liar, sneak, and other sorts of pet names, and told him they meant to call Chambers by a new name after this, and make it common in the town﻿—“Tom Driscoll’s niggerpappy,”﻿—to signify that he had had a second birth into this life, and that Chambers was the author of his new being.


Tom grew frantic under these taunts, and shouted﻿—
e:tom=angry

“Knock their heads off, Chambers! knock their heads off! What do you stand there with your hands in your pockets for?”
s=tom

Chambers expostulated, and said, “But, Marse Tom, dey’s too many of ’em﻿—dey’s﻿—”
s=chambers;e:chambers=fearful

“Do you hear me?”
s=tom

“Please, Marse Tom, don’t make me! Dey’s so many of ’em dat﻿—”
s=chambers

Tom sprang at him and drove his pocketknife into him two or three times before the boys could snatch him away and give the wounded lad a chance to escape.
s=none

He was considerably hurt, but not seriously. If the blade had been a little longer his career would have ended there.


Tom had long ago taught Roxy “her place.” It had been many a day now since she had ventured a caress or a fondling epithet in his quarter.


Such things, from a “nigger,” were repulsive to him, and she had been warned to keep her distance and remember who she was.


She saw her darling gradually cease from being her son, she saw *that* detail perish utterly; all that was left was master﻿—master, pure and simple, and it was not a gentle mastership, either.
e:roxana=unhappy

She saw herself sink from the sublime height of motherhood to the somber depths of unmodified slavery.


The abyss of separation between her and her boy was complete.


She was merely his chattel, now, his convenience, his dog, his cringing and helpless slave, the humble and unresisting victim of his capricious temper and vicious nature.


Sometimes she could not go to sleep, even when worn out with fatigue, because her rage boiled so high over the day’s experiences with her boy.
e:roxana=angry

She would mumble and mutter to herself﻿—


“He struck me, en I warn’t no way to blame﻿—struck me in de face, right before folks.”
s=roxana

“En he’s al’ays callin’ me nigger-wench, en hussy, en all dem mean names, when I’s doin’ de very bes’ I kin.”


“Oh, Lord, I done so much for him﻿—I lift’ him away up to what he is﻿—en dis is what I git for it.”
e:roxana=unhappy

Sometimes when some outrage of peculiar offensiveness stung her to the heart, she would plan schemes of vengeance and revel in the fancied spectacle of his exposure to the world as an imposter and a slave; but in the midst of these joys fear would strike her: she had made him too strong; she could prove nothing, and﻿—heavens, she might get sold down the river for her pains!
s=none;e:roxana=fearful

So her schemes always went for nothing, and she laid them aside in impotent rage against the fates, and against herself for playing the fool on that fatal September day in not providing herself with a witness for use in the day when such a thing might be needed for the appeasing of her vengeance-hungry heart.
e:roxana=angry

And yet the moment Tom happened to be good to her, and kind﻿—and this occurred every now and then﻿—all her sore places were healed, and she was happy; happy and proud, for this was her son, her nigger son, lording it among the whites and securely avenging their crimes against her race.
e:roxana=smirking

There were two grand funerals in Dawson’s Landing that fall﻿—the fall of 1845. One was that of Colonel Cecil Burleigh Essex, the other that of Percy Driscoll.
e:percy=neutral

On his deathbed Driscoll set Roxy free and delivered his idolized ostensible son solemnly into the keeping of his brother, the Judge and his wife.
e:roxana=neutral

Those childless people were glad to get him. Childless people are not difficult to please.
e:york=happy

Judge Driscoll had gone privately to his brother, a month before, and bought Chambers.


He had heard that Tom had been trying to get his father to sell the boy down the river, and he wanted to prevent the scandal﻿—for public sentiment did not approve of that way of treating family servants for light cause or for no cause.
e:tom=angry

Percy Driscoll had worn himself out in trying to save his great speculative landed estate, and had died without succeeding.


He was hardly in his grave before the boom collapsed and left his hitherto envied young devil of an heir a pauper.
e:tom=unhappy

But that was nothing; his uncle told him he should be his heir and have all his fortune when he died; so Tom was comforted.
e:tom=happy

Roxy had no home, now; so she resolved to go around and say goodbye to her friends and then clear out and see the world﻿—that is to say, she would go chambermaiding on a steamboat, the darling ambition of her race and sex.
e:roxana=happy

Her last call was on the black giant, Jasper. She found him chopping Pudd’nhead Wilson’s winter provision of wood.


Wilson was chatting with him when Roxy arrived. He asked her how she could bear to go off chambermaiding and leave her boys; and chaffingly offered to copy off a series of their fingerprints, reaching up to their twelfth year, for her to remember them by; but she sobered in a moment, wondering if he suspected anything; then she said she believed she didn’t want them.
e:wilson=neutral;e:roxana=wary

Wilson said to himself, “The drop of black blood in her is superstitious; she thinks there’s some devilry, some witch-business about my glass mystery somewhere; she used to come here with an old horseshoe in her hand; it could have been an accident, but I doubt it.”
s=wilson;e:wilson=thinking

## V. The Twins Thrill Dawson’s Landing
s=none

> Training is everything. The peach was once a bitter almond; cauliflower is nothing but cabbage with a college education. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


> Remark of Dr. Baldwin’s, concerning upstarts: We don’t care to eat toadstools that think they are truffles. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


Mrs. York Driscoll enjoyed two years of bliss with that prize, Tom—bliss that was troubled a little at times, it is true, but bliss nevertheless; then she died, and her husband and his childless sister, Mrs. Pratt, continued the bliss-business at the old stand.
n:rachel=Mrs. Rachel Pratt

Tom was petted and indulged and spoiled to his entire content—or nearly that.
e:tom=happy

This went on till he was nineteen, then he was sent to Yale.


He went handsomely equipped with “conditions,” but otherwise he was not an object of distinction there.


He remained at Yale two years, and then threw up the struggle.


He came home with his manners a good deal improved; he had lost his surliness and brusqueness, and was rather pleasantly soft and smooth, now; he was furtively, and sometimes openly, ironical of speech, and given to gently touching people on the raw, but he did it with a good-natured semiconscious air that carried it off safely, and kept him from getting into trouble.
e:tom=smirking

He was as indolent as ever and showed no very strenuous desire to hunt up an occupation.
e:tom=neutral

People argued from this that he preferred to be supported by his uncle until his uncle’s shoes should become vacant.
n:york=Judge Driscoll

He brought back one or two new habits with him, one of which he rather openly practised—tippling—but concealed another which was gambling.


It would not do to gamble where his uncle could hear of it; he knew that quite well.
e:tom=wary

Tom’s Eastern polish was not popular among the young people.
e:tom=unhappy

They could have endured it, perhaps, if Tom had stopped there; but he wore gloves, and that they couldn’t stand, and wouldn’t; so he was mainly without society.


He brought home with him a suit of clothes of such exquisite style and cut and fashion—Eastern fashion, city fashion—that it filled everybody with anguish and was regarded as a peculiarly wanton affront.
e:tom=happy

He enjoyed the feeling which he was exciting, and paraded the town serene and happy all day; but the young fellows set a tailor to work that night, and when Tom started out on his parade next morning he found the old deformed Negro bell-ringer straddling along in his wake tricked out in a flamboyant curtain-calico exaggeration of his finery, and imitating his fancy Eastern graces as well as he could.
e:tom=surprised

Tom surrendered, and after that clothed himself in the local fashion.
e:tom=unhappy

But the dull country town was tiresome to him, since his acquaintanceship with livelier regions, and it grew daily more and more so.
e:tom=weary

He began to make little trips to St. Louis for refreshment.
e:tom=happy

There he found companionship to suit him, and pleasures to his taste, along with more freedom, in some particulars, than he could have at home.


So, during the next two years his visits to the city grew in frequency and his tarryings there grew steadily longer in duration.


He was getting into deep waters.
e:tom=wary

He was taking chances, privately, which might get him into trouble some day—in fact, *did*.


Judge Driscoll had retired from the bench and from all business activities in 1850, and had now been comfortably idle three years.
e:york=neutral

He was president of the Freethinkers’ Society, and Pudd’nhead Wilson was the other member.


The society’s weekly discussions were now the old lawyer’s main interest in life.


Pudd’nhead was still toiling in obscurity at the bottom of the ladder, under the blight of that unlucky remark which he had let fall twenty-three years before about the dog.
e:wilson=weary

Judge Driscoll was his friend, and claimed that he had a mind above the average, but that was regarded as one of the Judge’s whims, and it failed to modify the public opinion.
e:york=serious

Or rather, that was one of the reasons why it failed, but there was another and better one.


If the Judge had stopped with bare assertion, it would have had a good deal of effect; but he made the mistake of trying to prove his position.
e:york=thinking

For some years Wilson had been privately at work on a whimsical almanac, for his amusement—a calendar, with a little dab of ostensible philosophy, usually in ironical form, appended to each date; and the Judge thought that these quips and fancies of Wilson’s were neatly turned and cute; so he carried a handful of them around, one day, and read them to some of the chief citizens.
e:wilson=thinking;e:york=happy

But irony was not for those people; their mental vision was not focused for it.
e:wilson=unhappy

They read those playful trifles in the solidest earnest, and decided without hesitancy that if there had ever been any doubt that Dave Wilson was a pudd’nhead—which there hadn’t—this revelation removed that doubt for good and all.


That is just the way in this world; an enemy can partly ruin a man, but it takes a good-natured injudicious friend to complete the thing and make it perfect.


After this the Judge felt tenderer than ever toward Wilson, and surer than ever that his calendar had merit.
e:york=neutral

Judge Driscoll could be a freethinker and still hold his place in society because he was the person of most consequence in the community, and therefore could venture to go his own way and follow out his own notions.


The other member of his pet organization was allowed the like liberty because he was a cipher in the estimation of the public, and nobody attached any importance to what he thought or did.


He was liked, he was welcome enough all around, but he simply didn’t count for anything.
e:wilson=neutral

The widow Cooper—affectionately called “aunt Patsy” by everybody—lived in a snug and comely cottage with her daughter Rowena, who was nineteen, romantic, amiable, and very pretty, but otherwise of no consequence.
n:patsy=Aunt Patsy Cooper;n:rowena=Rowena

Rowena had a couple of young brothers—also of no consequence.


The widow had a large spare room which she let to a lodger, with board, when she could find one, but this room had been empty for a year now, to her sorrow.
e:patsy=unhappy

Her income was only sufficient for the family support, and she needed the lodging-money for trifling luxuries.


But now, at last, on a flaming June day, she found herself happy; her tedious wait was ended; her year-worn advertisement had been answered; and not by a village applicant, oh, no!—this letter was from away off yonder in the dim great world to the North: it was from St. Louis.
e:patsy=happy

She sat on her porch gazing out with unseeing eyes upon the shining reaches of the mighty Mississippi, her thoughts steeped in her good fortune.


Indeed, it was specially good fortune, for she was to have two lodgers instead of one.


She had read the letter to the family, and Rowena had danced away to see to the cleaning and airing of the room by the slave woman Nancy, and the boys had rushed abroad in the town to spread the great news, for it was matter of public interest, and the public would wonder and not be pleased if not informed.
e:rowena=excited;n:nancy=Nancy

Presently Rowena returned, all ablush with joyous excitement, and begged for a rereading of the letter.
e:rowena=happy

It was framed thus:


> **Honored Madam:** My brother and I have seen your advertisement, by chance, and beg leave to take the room you offer. We are twenty-four years of age and twins. We are Italians by birth, but have lived long in the various countries of Europe, and several years in the United States. Our names are Luigi and Angelo Capello. You desire but one guest; but dear Madam, if you will allow us to pay for two, we will not incommode you. We shall be down Thursday.
n:luigi=Luigi Capello;n:angelo=Angelo Capello

“Italians! How romantic! Just think, ma—there’s never been one in this town, and everybody will be dying to see them, and they’re all *ours*! Think of that!”
s=rowena;e:rowena=excited;e:patsy=happy

“Yes, I reckon they’ll make a grand stir.”
s=patsy

“Oh, indeed they will. The whole town will be on its head! Think—they’ve been in Europe and everywhere! There’s never been a traveler in this town before. Ma, I shouldn’t wonder if they’ve seen kings!”
s=rowena;e:rowena=excited

“Well, a body can’t tell, but they’ll make stir enough, without that.”
s=patsy;e:patsy=neutral

“Yes, that’s of course. Luigi—Angelo. They’re lovely names; and so grand and foreign—not like Jones and Robinson and such.”
s=rowena;e:rowena=happy

“Thursday they are coming, and this is only Tuesday; it’s a cruel long time to wait.”
e:rowena=unhappy

“Here comes Judge Driscoll in at the gate. He’s heard about it. I’ll go and open the door.”
e:rowena=excited

The Judge was full of congratulations and curiosity. The letter was read and discussed.
s=none;e:york=happy

Soon Justice Robinson arrived with more congratulations, and there was a new reading and a new discussion.
n:robinson=Justice Robinson

This was the beginning.


Neighbor after neighbor, of both sexes, followed, and the procession drifted in and out all day and evening and all Wednesday and Thursday.


The letter was read and reread until it was nearly worn out; everybody admired its courtly and gracious tone, and smooth and practised style, everybody was sympathetic and excited, and the Coopers were steeped in happiness all the while.
e:patsy=happy;e:rowena=happy

The boats were very uncertain in low water, in these primitive times.


This time the Thursday boat had not arrived at ten at night—so the people had waited at the landing all day for nothing; they were driven to their homes by a heavy storm without having had a view of the illustrious foreigners.
e:rowena=unhappy;e:patsy=unhappy

Eleven o’clock came; and the Cooper house was the only one in the town that still had lights burning.


The rain and thunder were booming yet, and the anxious family were still waiting, still hoping.


At last there was a knock at the door and the family jumped to open it.
e:patsy=excited;e:rowena=excited

Two Negro men entered, each carrying a trunk, and proceeded upstairs toward the guestroom.


Then entered the twins—the handsomest, the best dressed, the most distinguished-looking pair of young fellows the West had ever seen.
e:luigi=neutral;e:angelo=neutral

One was a little fairer than the other, but otherwise they were exact duplicates.


## VI. Swimming in Glory


> Let us endeavor so to live that when we come to die even the undertaker will be sorry. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


> Habit is habit, and not to be flung out of the window by any man, but coaxed downstairs a step at a time. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


At breakfast in the morning the twins’ charm of manner and easy and polished bearing made speedy conquest of the family’s good graces.
e:luigi=happy;e:angelo=happy;e:patsy=happy;e:rowena=happy

All constraint and formality quickly disappeared, and the friendliest feeling succeeded.


Aunt Patsy called them by their Christian names almost from the beginning.


She was full of the keenest curiosity about them, and showed it; they responded by talking about themselves, which pleased her greatly.
e:patsy=excited

It presently appeared that in their early youth they had known poverty and hardship.
e:luigi=serious;e:angelo=serious

As the talk wandered along the old lady watched for the right place to drop in a question or two concerning that matter, and when she found it she said to the blond twin who was now doing the biographies in his turn while the brunette one rested—


“If it ain’t asking what I ought not to ask, Mr. Angelo, how did you come to be so friendless and in such trouble when you were little?”
s=patsy

“Do you mind telling? But don’t if you do.”


“Oh, we don’t mind it at all, madam; in our case it was merely misfortune, and nobody’s fault.”
s=angelo;e:angelo=neutral

“Our parents were well to do, there in Italy, and we were their only child.”


“We were of the old Florentine nobility”—Rowena’s heart gave a great bound, her nostrils expanded, and a fine light played in her eyes—“and when the war broke out my father was on the losing side and had to fly for his life.”
e:angelo=thinking;e:rowena=excited

“His estates were confiscated, his personal property seized, and there we were, in Germany, strangers, friendless, and in fact paupers.”


“My brother and I were ten years old, and well educated for that age, very studious, very fond of our books, and well grounded in the German, French, Spanish, and English languages.”
e:rowena=unhappy;e:patsy=unhappy;e:angelo=serious

“Also, we were marvelous musical prodigies—if you will allow me to say it, it being only the truth.”


“Our father survived his misfortunes only a month, our mother soon followed him, and we were alone in the world.”
e:angelo=unhappy

“Our parents could have made themselves comfortable by exhibiting us as a show, and they had many and large offers; but the thought revolted their pride, and they said they would starve and die first.”
e:angelo=serious

“But what they wouldn’t consent to do we had to do without the formality of consent.”


“We were seized for the debts occasioned by their illness and their funerals, and placed among the attractions of a cheap museum in Berlin to earn the liquidation money.”
e:angelo=unhappy

“It took us two years to get out of that slavery.”


“We traveled all about Germany receiving no wages, and not even our keep. We had to be exhibited for nothing, and beg our bread.”
e:angelo=thinking

“Well, madam, the rest is not of much consequence.”
e:angelo=neutral

“When we escaped from that slavery at twelve years of age, we were in some respects men.”


“Experience had taught us some valuable things; among others, how to take care of ourselves, how to avoid and defeat sharks and sharpers, and how to conduct our own business for our own profit and without other people’s help.”
e:angelo=thinking

“We traveled everywhere—years and years—picking up smatterings of strange tongues, familiarizing ourselves with strange sights and strange customs, accumulating an education of a wide and varied and curious sort.”
e:angelo=neutral

“It was a pleasant life. We went to Venice—to London, Paris, Russia, India, China, Japan—”
e:angelo=happy

At this point Nancy the slave woman thrust her head in at the door and exclaimed:
s=none

“Ole Missus, de house is plum’ jam full o’ people, en dey’s jes a-spi’lin’ to see de gen’lmen!”
s=nancy;e:nancy=excited

She indicated the twins with a nod of her head, and tucked it back out of sight again.
s=none

It was a proud occasion for the widow, and she promised herself high satisfaction in showing off her fine foreign birds before her neighbors and friends—simple folk who had hardly ever seen a foreigner of any kind, and never one of any distinction or style.
e:patsy=happy

Yet her feeling was moderate indeed when contrasted with Rowena’s.


Rowena was in the clouds, she walked on air; this was to be the greatest day, the most romantic episode, in the colorless history of that dull country town.
e:rowena=happy

She was to be familiarly near the source of its glory and feel the full flood of it pour over her and about her; the other girls could only gaze and envy, not partake.
e:rowena=excited

The widow was ready, Rowena was ready, so also were the foreigners.
e:luigi=happy;e:angelo=happy

The party moved along the hall, the twins in advance, and entered the open parlor door, whence issued a low hum of conversation.


The twins took a position near the door, the widow stood at Luigi’s side, Rowena stood beside Angelo, and the march-past and the introductions began.


The widow was all smiles and contentment. She received the procession and passed it on to Rowena.


“Good mornin’, Sister Cooper”—handshake.
n:higgins=Mr. Higgins;s=higgins

“Good morning, Brother Higgins—Count Luigi Capello, Mr. Higgins”—handshake, followed by a devouring stare and “I’m glad to see ye,” on the part of Higgins, and a courteous inclination of the head and a pleasant “Most happy!” on the part of Count Luigi.
s=patsy

“Good mornin’, Roweny”—handshake.
s=higgins

“Good morning, Mr. Higgins—present you to Count Angelo Capello.”
s=rowena

Handshake, admiring stare, “Glad to see ye,”—courteous nod, smily “Most happy!” and Higgins passes on.
s=higgins;e:angelo=happy

None of these visitors was at ease, but, being honest people, they didn’t pretend to be.
s=none

None of them had ever seen a person bearing a title of nobility before, and none had been expecting to see one now, consequently the title came upon them as a kind of pile-driving surprise and caught them unprepared.


A few tried to rise to the emergency, and got out an awkward “My lord,” or “Your lordship,” or something of that sort, but the great majority were overwhelmed by the unaccustomed word and its dim and awful associations with gilded courts and stately ceremony and anointed kingship, so they only fumbled through the handshake and passed on, speechless.


Now and then, as happens at all receptions everywhere, a more than ordinary friendly soul blocked the procession and kept it waiting while he inquired how the brothers liked the village, and how long they were going to stay, and if their families were well, and dragged in the weather, and hoped it would get cooler soon, and all that sort of thing, so as to be able to say, when they got home, “I had quite a long talk with them”; but nobody did or said anything of a regrettable kind, and so the great affair went through to the end in a creditable and satisfactory fashion.


General conversation followed, and the twins drifted about from group to group, talking easily and fluently and winning approval, compelling admiration and achieving favor from all.
e:luigi=happy;e:angelo=happy

The widow followed their conquering march with a proud eye, and every now and then Rowena said to herself with deep satisfaction, “And to think they are ours—all ours!”
t=rowena;e:patsy=happy;e:rowena=happy

There were no idle moments for mother or daughter.
t=none

Eager inquiries concerning the twins were pouring into their enchanted ears all the time; each was the constant center of a group of breathless listeners; each recognized that she knew now for the first time the real meaning of that great word Glory, and perceived the stupendous value of it, and understood why men in all ages had been willing to throw away meaner happinesses, treasure, life itself, to get a taste of its sublime and supreme joy.
e:rowena=excited

Napoleon and all his kind stood accounted for—and justified.


When Rowena had at last done all her duty by the people in the parlor, she went upstairs to satisfy the longings of an overflow-meeting there, for the parlor was not big enough to hold all the comers.


Again she was besieged by eager questioners and again she swam in sunset seas of glory.


When the forenoon was nearly gone, she recognized with a pang that this most splendid episode of her life was almost over, that nothing could prolong it, that nothing quite its equal could ever fall to her fortune again.
e:rowena=unhappy

But never mind, it was sufficient unto itself, the grand occasion had moved on an ascending scale from the start, and was a noble and memorable success.
e:rowena=happy

If the twins could but do some crowning act, now, to climax it, something unusual, something startling, something to concentrate upon themselves the company’s loftiest admiration, something in the nature of an electric surprise—
e:rowena=thinking

Here a prodigious slam-banging broke out below, and everybody rushed down to see.
e:rowena=surprised

It was the twins knocking out a classic four-handed piece on the piano, in great style.
e:luigi=happy;e:angelo=happy

Rowena was satisfied—satisfied down to the bottom of her heart.
e:rowena=happy

The young strangers were kept long at the piano. The villagers were astonished and enchanted with the magnificence of their performance, and could not bear to have them stop.


All the music that they had ever heard before seemed spiritless prentice-work and barren of grace or charm when compared with these intoxicating floods of melodious sound.


They realized that for once in their lives they were hearing masters.


## VII. The Unknown Nymph


> One of the most striking differences between a cat and a lie is that a cat has only nine lives. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


The company broke up reluctantly, and drifted toward their several homes, chatting with vivacity, and all agreeing that it would be many a long day before Dawson’s Landing would see the equal of this one again.


The twins had accepted several invitations while the reception was in progress, and had also volunteered to play some duets at an amateur entertainment for the benefit of a local charity.


Society was eager to receive them to its bosom. Judge Driscoll had the good fortune to secure them for an immediate drive, and to be the first to display them in public.
e:york=happy

They entered his buggy with him, and were paraded down the main street, everybody flocking to the windows and sidewalks to see.


The Judge showed the strangers the new graveyard, and the jail, and where the richest man lived, and the Freemasons’ hall, and the Methodist church, and the Presbyterian church, and where the Baptist church was going to be when they got some money to build it with, and showed them the town hall and the slaughterhouse, and got out the independent fire company in uniform and had them put out an imaginary fire; then he let them inspect the muskets of the militia company, and poured out an exhaustless stream of enthusiasm over all these splendors, and seemed very well satisfied with the responses he got, for the twins admired his admiration, and paid him back the best they could, though they could have done better if some fifteen or sixteen hundred thousand previous experiences of this sort in various countries had not already rubbed off a considerable part of the novelty of it.
e:york=excited

The Judge laid himself out hospitably to make them have a good time, and if there was a defect anywhere it was not his fault.
e:york=happy

He told them a good many humorous anecdotes, and always forgot the nub, but they were always able to furnish it, for these yarns were of a pretty early vintage, and they had had many a rejuvenating pull at them before.


And he told them all about his several dignities, and how he had held this and that and the other place of honor or profit, and had once been to the legislature, and was now president of the Society of Freethinkers.
e:york=serious

He said the society had been in existence four years, and already had two members, and was firmly established.


He would call for the brothers in the evening if they would like to attend a meeting of it.


Accordingly he called for them, and on the way he told them all about Pudd’nhead Wilson, in order that they might get a favorable impression of him in advance and be prepared to like him.
e:york=neutral

This scheme succeeded—the favorable impression was achieved.


Later it was confirmed and solidified when Wilson proposed that out of courtesy to the strangers the usual topics be put aside and the hour be devoted to conversation upon ordinary subjects and the cultivation of friendly relations and good-fellowship—a proposition which was put to vote and carried.
e:wilson=happy

The hour passed quickly away in lively talk, and when it was ended the lonesome and neglected Wilson was richer by two friends than he had been when it began.


He invited the twins to look in at his lodgings, presently, after disposing of an intervening engagement, and they accepted with pleasure.


Toward the middle of the evening they found themselves on the road to his house.


Pudd’nhead was at home waiting for them and putting in his time puzzling over a thing which had come under his notice that morning.
e:wilson=thinking

The matter was this: He happened to be up very early—at dawn, in fact; and he crossed the hall which divided his cottage through the center, and entered a room to get something there.


The window of the room had no curtains, for that side of the house had long been unoccupied, and through this window he caught sight of something which surprised and interested him.
e:wilson=surprised

It was a young woman—a young woman where properly no young woman belonged; for she was in Judge Driscoll’s house, and in the bedroom over the Judge’s private study or sitting-room.


This was young Tom Driscoll’s bedroom. He and the Judge, the Judge’s widowed sister Mrs. Pratt and three Negro servants were the only people who belonged in the house.


Who, then, might this young lady be? The two houses were separated by an ordinary yard, with a low fence running back through its middle from the street in front to the lane in the rear.
e:wilson=confused

The distance was not great, and Wilson was able to see the girl very well, the window-shades of the room she was in being up, and the window also.


The girl had on a neat and trim summer dress, patterned in broad stripes of pink and white, and her bonnet was equipped with a pink veil.


She was practising steps, gaits and attitudes, apparently; she was doing the thing gracefully, and was very much absorbed in her work.


Who could she be, and how came she to be in young Tom Driscoll’s room?
e:wilson=thinking

Wilson had quickly chosen a position from which he could watch the girl without running much risk of being seen by her, and he remained there hoping she would raise her veil and betray her face.


But she disappointed him. After a matter of twenty minutes she disappeared, and although he stayed at his post half an hour longer, she came no more.
e:wilson=unhappy

Toward noon he dropped in at the Judge’s and talked with Mrs. Pratt about the great event of the day, the levee of the distinguished foreigners at Aunt Patsy Cooper’s.
e:wilson=neutral

He asked after her nephew Tom, and she said he was on his way home, and that she was expecting him to arrive a little before night; and added that she and the Judge were gratified to gather from his letters that he was conducting himself very nicely and creditably—at which Wilson winked to himself privately.
e:wilson=smirking

Wilson did not ask if there was a newcomer in the house, but he asked questions that would have brought light-throwing answers as to that matter if Mrs. Pratt had had any light to throw; so he went away satisfied that he knew of things that were going on in her house of which she herself was not aware.
e:wilson=neutral

He was now waiting for the twins, and still puzzling over the problem of who that girl might be, and how she happened to be in that young fellow’s room at daybreak in the morning.
e:wilson=thinking

## VIII. Marse Tom Tramples His Chance


> The holy passion of Friendship is of so sweet and steady and loyal and enduring a nature that it will last through a whole lifetime, if not asked to lend money. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


> Consider well the proportions of things. It is better to be a young June-bug than an old bird of paradise. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


It is necessary now, to hunt up Roxy.


At the time she was set free and went away chambermaiding, she was thirty-five.


She got a berth as second chambermaid on a Cincinnati boat in the New Orleans trade, the *Grand Mogul*.


A couple of trips made her wonted and easygoing at the work, and infatuated her with the stir and adventure and independence of steamboat life.
e:roxana=happy

Then she was promoted and became head chambermaid. She was a favorite with the officers, and exceedingly proud of their joking and friendly way with her.


During eight years she served three parts of the year on that boat, and the winters on a Vicksburg packet.


But now for two months she had had rheumatism in her arms, and was obliged to let the washtub alone.
e:roxana=unhappy

So she resigned. But she was well fixed—rich, as she would have described it; for she had lived a steady life, and had banked four dollars every month in New Orleans as a provision for her old age.


She said in the start that she had “put shoes on one bar’footed nigger to tromple on her with,” and that one mistake like that was enough; she would be independent of the human race thenceforth forevermore if hard work and economy could accomplish it.
e:roxana=serious

When the boat touched the levee at New Orleans she bade goodbye to her comrades on the *Grand Mogul* and moved her kit ashore.


But she was back in a hour. The bank had gone to smash and carried her four hundred dollars with it.
e:roxana=surprised

She was a pauper, and homeless. Also disabled bodily, at least for the present.
e:roxana=unhappy

The officers were full of sympathy for her in her trouble, and made up a little purse for her.


She resolved to go to her birthplace; she had friends there among the Negroes, and the unfortunate always help the unfortunate, she was well aware of that; those lowly comrades of her youth would not let her starve.


She took the little local packet at Cairo, and now she was on the homestretch.


Time had worn away her bitterness against her son, and she was able to think of him with serenity.
e:roxana=neutral

She put the vile side of him out of her mind, and dwelt only on recollections of his occasional acts of kindness to her.


She gilded and otherwise decorated these, and made them very pleasant to contemplate. She began to long to see him.
e:roxana=thinking

She would go and fawn upon him, slave-like—for this would have to be her attitude, of course—and maybe she would find that time had modified him, and that he would be glad to see his long-forgotten old nurse and treat her gently.


That would be lovely; that would make her forget her woes and her poverty.
e:roxana=happy

Her poverty!


That thought inspired her to add another castle to her dream: maybe he would give her a trifle now and then—maybe a dollar, once a month, say; any little thing like that would help, oh, ever so much.


By the time she reached Dawson’s Landing she was her old self again; her blues were gone, she was in high feather. She would get along, surely; there were many kitchens where the servants would share their meals with her, and also steal sugar and apples and other dainties for her to carry home—or give her a chance to pilfer them herself, which would answer just as well.


And there was the church. She was a more rabid and devoted Methodist than ever, and her piety was no sham, but was strong and sincere.


Yes, with plenty of creature comforts and her old place in the amen-corner in her possession again, she would be perfectly happy and at peace thenceforward to the end.


She went to Judge Driscoll’s kitchen first of all. She was received there in great form and with vast enthusiasm.


Her wonderful travels, and the strange countries she had seen and the adventures she had had, made her a marvel, and a heroine of romance.


The Negroes hung enchanted upon the great story of her experiences, interrupting her all along with eager questions, with laughter, exclamations of delight and expressions of applause; and she was obliged to confess to herself that if there was anything better in this world than steamboating, it was the glory to be got by telling about it.


The audience loaded her stomach with their dinners, and then stole the pantry bare to load up her basket.


Tom was in St. Louis. The servants said he had spent the best part of his time there during the previous two years.


Roxy came every day, and had many talks about the family and its affairs.


Once she asked why Tom was away so much. The ostensible “Chambers” said:
e:chambers=neutral

“De fac’ is, ole marster kin git along better when young marster’s away den he kin when he’s in de town; yes, en he love him better, too; so he gives him fifty dollahs a month—”
s=chambers

“No, is dat so? Chambers, you’s a-jokin’, ain’t you?”
s=roxana;e:roxana=surprised

“ ’Clah to goodness I ain’t, mammy; Marse Tom tole me so his own self. But nemmine, ’tain’t enough.”
s=chambers

“My lan’, what de reason ’tain’t enough?”
s=roxana

“Well, I’s gwine to tell you, if you gimme a chanst, mammy. De reason it ain’t enough is ’ca’se Marse Tom gambles.”
s=chambers

Roxy threw up her hands in astonishment and Chambers went on—
s=none

“Ole marster found it out, ’ca’se he had to pay two hundred dollahs for Marse Tom’s gamblin’ debts, en dat’s true, mammy, jes as dead certain as you’s bawn.”
s=chambers

“Two—hund’d—dollahs! Why, what is you talkin’ ’bout? Two—hund’d—dollahs.”
s=roxana;e:roxana=surprised

“Sakes alive, it’s ’mos’ enough to buy a tol’able good secondhand nigger wid. En you ain’t lyin’, honey?—you wouldn’t lie to yo’ ole mammy?”


“It’s God’s own truth, jes as I tell you—two hund’d dollahs—I wisht I may never stir outen my tracks if it ain’t so.”
s=chambers

“En, oh, my lan’, ole Marse was jes a-hoppin’! he was b’ilin’ mad, I tell you! He tuck ’n’ dissenhurrit him.”
e:chambers=excited

He licked his chops with relish after that stately word.
s=none;e:chambers=happy

Roxy struggled with it a moment, then gave it up and said—
e:roxana=confused;s=none

“Dissen*whiched* him?”
s=roxana

“Dissenhurrit him.”
s=chambers;e:chambers=happy

“What’s dat? What do it mean?”
s=roxana

“Means he bu’sted de will.”
s=chambers

“Bu’s—ted de will! He wouldn’t *ever* treat him so! Take it back, you mis’able imitation nigger dat I bore in sorrow en tribbilation.”
s=roxana;e:roxana=angry

Roxy’s pet castle—an occasional dollar from Tom’s pocket—was tumbling to ruin before her eyes.
s=none;e:roxana=unhappy

She could not abide such a disaster as that; she couldn’t endure the thought of it.


Her remark amused Chambers:
e:chambers=happy

“Yah-yah-yah! jes listen to dat! If I’s imitation, what is you? Bofe of us is imitation *white*—dat’s what we is—en pow’ful good imitation, too—yah-yah-yah!—we don’t ’mount to noth’n as imitation *niggers*; en as for—”
s=chambers

“Shet up yo’ foolin’, ’fo’ I knock you side de head, en tell me ’bout de will. Tell me ’tain’t bu’sted—do, honey, en I’ll never forgit you.”
s=roxana;e:roxana=angry

“Well, *’tain’t*—’ca’se dey’s a new one made, en Marse Tom’s all right ag’in. But what is you in sich a sweat ’bout it for, mammy? ’Tain’t none o’ your business I don’t reckon.”
s=chambers;e:chambers=neutral

“ ’Tain’t none o’ my business? Whose business is it den, I’d like to know? Wuz I his mother tell he was fifteen years old, or wusn’t I?—you answer me dat.”
s=roxana

“En you speck I could see him turned out po’ en ornery on de worl’ en never care noth’n’ ’bout it? I reckon if you’d ever be’n a mother yo’self, Valet de Chambers, you wouldn’t talk sich foolishness as dat.”


“Well, den, ole Marse forgive him en fixed up de will ag’in—do dat satisfy you?”
s=chambers

Yes, she was satisfied now, and quite happy and sentimental over it.
s=none;e:roxana=happy

She kept coming daily, and at last she was told that Tom had come home.
e:roxana=excited

She began to tremble with emotion, and straightway sent to beg him to let his “po’ ole nigger mammy have jes one sight of him en die for joy.”


Tom was stretched at his lazy ease on a sofa when Chambers brought the petition.
e:tom=neutral

Time had not modified his ancient detestation of the humble drudge and protector of his boyhood; it was still bitter and uncompromising. He sat up and bent a severe gaze upon the fair face of the young fellow whose name he was unconsciously using and whose family rights he was enjoying.
e:tom=scowling

He maintained the gaze until the victim of it had become satisfactorily pallid with terror, then he said—
e:chambers=fearful

“What does the old rip want with me?”
s=tom

The petition was meekly repeated.
s=none

“Who gave you permission to come and disturb me with the social attentions of niggers?”
s=tom;e:tom=angry

Tom had risen. The other young man was trembling now, visibly.
s=none

He saw what was coming, and bent his head sideways, and put up his left arm to shield it.


Tom rained cuffs upon the head and its shield, saying no word: the victim received each blow with a beseeching, “Please, Marse Tom!—oh, please, Marse Tom!”
s=chambers

Seven blows—then Tom said, “Face the door—march!”
s=tom

He followed behind with one, two, three solid kicks.
s=none

The last one helped the pure-white slave over the doorsill, and he limped away mopping his eyes with his old ragged sleeve.


Tom shouted after him, “Send her in!”
s=tom

Then he flung himself panting on the sofa again, and rasped out the remark, “He arrived just at the right moment; I was full to the brim with bitter thinkings, and nobody to take it out of. How refreshing it was! I feel better.”
e:tom=happy

Tom’s mother entered now, closing the door behind her, and approached her son with all the wheedling and supplicating servilities that fear and interest can impart to the words and attitudes of the born slave.
e:roxana=happy;s=none

She stopped a yard from her boy and made two or three admiring exclamations over his manly stature and general handsomeness, and Tom put an arm under his head and hoisted a leg over the sofa-back in order to look properly indifferent.
e:tom=neutral

“My lan’, how you is growed, honey! ’Clah to goodness, I wouldn’t a-knowed you, Marse Tom! ’deed I wouldn’t!”
s=roxana

“Look at me good; does you ’member old Roxy?—does you know yo’ old nigger mammy, honey? Well, now, I kin lay down en die in peace, ’ca’se I’se seed—”


“Cut it short, ——— it, cut it short! What is it you want?”
s=tom;e:tom=angry

“You heah dat? Jes the same old Marse Tom, al’ays so gay and funnin’ wid de ole mammy. I ’uz jes as shore—”
s=roxana

“Cut it short, I tell you, and get along! What do you want?”
s=tom

This was a bitter disappointment. Roxy had for so many days nourished and fondled and petted her notion that Tom would be glad to see his old nurse, and would make her proud and happy to the marrow with a cordial word or two, that it took two rebuffs to convince her that he was not funning, and that her beautiful dream was a fond and foolish vanity, a shabby and pitiful mistake.
s=none;e:roxana=unhappy

She was hurt to the heart, and so ashamed that for a moment she did not quite know what to do or how to act.


Then her breast began to heave, the tears came, and in her forlornness she was moved to try that other dream of hers—an appeal to her boy’s charity; and so, upon the impulse, and without reflection, she offered her supplication:
e:roxana=crying

“Oh, Marse Tom, de po’ ole mammy is in sich hard luck dese days; en she’s kinder crippled in de arms en can’t work, en if you could gimme a dollah—on’y jes one little dol—”
s=roxana

Tom was on his feet so suddenly that the supplicant was startled into a jump herself.
s=none

“A dollar!—give you a dollar! I’ve a notion to strangle you!”
s=tom

“Is *that* your errand here? Clear out! and be quick about it!”


Roxy backed slowly toward the door. When she was halfway she stopped, and said mournfully:
s=none

“Marse Tom, I nussed you when you was a little baby, en I raised you all by myself tell you was ’most a young man; en now you is young en rich, en I is po’ en gitt’n ole, en I come heah b’lievin’ dat you would he’p de ole mammy ’long down de little road dat’s lef’ ’twix’ her en de grave, en—”
s=roxana

Tom relished this tune less than any that had preceded it, for it began to wake up a sort of echo in his conscience; so he interrupted and said with decision, though without asperity, that he was not in a situation to help her, and wasn’t going to do it.
s=none;e:tom=unhappy

“Ain’t you ever gwine to he’p me, Marse Tom?”
s=roxana

“No! Now go away and don’t bother me any more.”
s=tom;e:tom=angry

Roxy’s head was down, in an attitude of humility. But now the fires of her old wrongs flamed up in her breast and began to burn fiercely.
s=none;e:roxana=angry

She raised her head slowly, till it was well up, and at the same time her great frame unconsciously assumed an erect and masterful attitude, with all the majesty and grace of her vanished youth in it.


She raised her finger and punctuated with it:


“You has said de word. You has had yo’ chance, en you has trompled it under yo’ foot. When you git another one, you’ll git down on yo’ knees en *beg* for it!”
s=roxana

A cold chill went to Tom’s heart, he didn’t know why; for he did not reflect that such words, from such an incongruous source, and so solemnly delivered, could not easily fail of that effect.
s=none;e:tom=fearful

However, he did the natural thing: he replied with bluster and mockery:


“*You’ll* give me a chance—*you*! Perhaps I’d better get down on my knees now! But in case I don’t—just for argument’s sake—what’s going to happen, pray?”
s=tom;e:tom=smirking

“Dis is what is gwine to happen. I’s gwine as straight to yo’ uncle as I kin walk, en tell him every las’ thing I knows ’bout you.”
s=roxana;e:roxana=serious

Tom’s cheek blenched, and she saw it. Disturbing thoughts began to chase each other through his head.
s=none;e:tom=fearful

“How can she know? And yet she must have found out—she looks it.”
t=tom;e:tom=thinking

“I’ve had the will back only three months, and am already deep in debt again, and moving heaven and earth to save myself from exposure and destruction, with a reasonably fair show of getting the thing covered up if I’m let alone, and now this fiend has gone and found me out somehow or other.”


“I wonder how much she knows? Oh, oh, oh, it’s enough to break a body’s heart! But I’ve got to humor her—there’s no other way.”
e:tom=fearful

Then he worked up a rather sickly sample of a gay laugh and a hollow chipperness of manner, and said:
t=none;e:tom=smirking

“Well, well, Roxy dear, old friends like you and me mustn’t quarrel. Here’s your dollar—now tell me what you know.”
s=tom

He held out the wildcat bill; she stood as she was, and made no movement.
s=none

It was her turn to scorn persuasive foolery, now, and she did not waste it.


She said, with a grim implacability in voice and manner which made Tom almost realize that even a former slave can remember for ten minutes insults and injuries returned for compliments and flatteries received, and can also enjoy taking revenge for them when the opportunity offers:


“What does I know? I’ll tell you what I knows. I knows enough to bu’st dat will to flinders—en more, mind you, *more*!”
s=roxana;e:roxana=angry

Tom was aghast.
s=none;e:tom=surprised

“More?” he said. “What do you call more? Where’s there any room for more?”
s=tom

Roxy laughed a mocking laugh, and said scoffingly, with a toss of her head, and her hands on her hips—
s=none;e:roxana=smirking

“Yes!—oh, I reckon! *Co’se* you’d like to know—wid yo’ po’ little ole rag dollah.”
s=roxana

“What you reckon I’s gwine to tell *you* for?—you ain’t got no money. I’s gwine to tell yo’ uncle—en I’ll do it dis minute, too—he’ll gimme *five* dollahs for de news, en mighty glad, too.”


She swung herself around disdainfully, and started away. Tom was in a panic.
s=none;e:tom=fearful

He seized her skirts, and implored her to wait. She turned and said, loftily—


“Look-a-heah, what ’uz it I tole you?”
s=roxana;e:roxana=serious

“You—you—I don’t remember anything. What was it you told me?”
s=tom

“I tole you dat de next time I give you a chance you’d git down on yo’ knees en beg for it.”
s=roxana

Tom was stupefied for a moment. He was panting with excitement. Then he said:
s=none

“Oh, Roxy, you wouldn’t require your young master to do such a horrible thing. You can’t mean it.”
s=tom

“I’ll let you know mighty quick whether I means it or not! You call me names, en as good as spit on me when I comes here po’ en ornery en ’umble, to praise you for bein’ growed up so fine en handsome, en tell you how I used to nuss you en tend you en watch you when you ’uz sick en hadn’t no mother but me in de whole worl’, en beg you to give de po’ ole nigger a dollah for to git her som’n’ to eat, en you call me names—*names*, dad blame you!”
s=roxana;e:roxana=angry

“Yassir, I gives you jes one chance mo’, and dat’s *now*, en it las’ on’y a half a second—you hear?”


Tom slumped to his knees and began to beg, saying—
s=none;e:tom=unhappy

“You see, I’m begging, and it’s honest begging, too! Now tell me, Roxy, tell me.”
s=tom

The heir of two centuries of unatoned insult and outrage looked down on him and seemed to drink in deep draughts of satisfaction.
s=none;e:roxana=happy

Then she said—


“Fine nice young white gen’l’man kneelin’ down to a nigger-wench! I’s wanted to see dat jes once befo’ I’s called.”
s=roxana

“Now, Gabr’el, blow de hawn, I’s ready… Git up!”


Tom did it. He said, humbly—
s=none

“Now, Roxy, don’t punish me any more. I deserved what I’ve got, but be good and let me off with that.”
s=tom

“Don’t go to uncle. Tell me—I’ll give you the five dollars.”


“Yes, I bet you will; en you won’t stop dah, nuther. But I ain’t gwine to tell you heah—”
s=roxana;e:roxana=smirking

“Good gracious, no!”
s=tom;e:tom=fearful

“Is you ’feared o’ de ha’nted house?”
s=roxana

“N-no.”
s=tom

“Well, den, you come to de ha’nted house ’bout ten or ’leven tonight, en climb up de ladder, ’ca’se de sta’r-steps is broke down, en you’ll find me. I’s a-roostin’ in de ha’nted house ’ca’se I can’t ’ford to roos’ nowhers’ else.”
s=roxana

She started toward the door, but stopped and said, “Gimme de dollah bill!” He gave it to her.
s=none

She examined it and said, “H’m—like enough de bank’s bu’sted.” She started again, but halted again.
s=roxana;e:roxana=neutral

“Has you got any whisky?”


“Yes, a little.”
s=tom

“Fetch it!”
s=roxana

He ran to his room overhead and brought down a bottle which was two-thirds full.
s=none

She tilted it up and took a drink. Her eyes sparkled with satisfaction, and she tucked the bottle under her shawl, saying, “It’s prime. I’ll take it along.”
s=roxana;e:roxana=happy

Tom humbly held the door for her, and she marched out as grim and erect as a grenadier.
s=none

## IX. Tom Practises Sycophancy


> Why is it that we rejoice at a birth and grieve at a funeral? It is because we are not the person involved. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


> It is easy to find fault, if one has that disposition. There was once a man who, not being able to find any other fault with his coal, complained that there were too many prehistoric toads in it. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


Tom flung himself on the sofa, and put his throbbing head in his hands, and rested his elbows on his knees.
e:tom=unhappy

He rocked himself back and forth and moaned.


“I’ve knelt to a nigger wench!” he muttered.
s=tom

“I thought I had struck the deepest depths of degradation before, but oh, dear, it was nothing to this…”


“Well, there is one consolation, such as it is—I’ve struck bottom this time; there’s nothing lower.”


But that was a hasty conclusion.
s=none

At ten that night he climbed the ladder in the haunted house, pale, weak and wretched.


Roxy was standing in the door of one of the rooms, waiting, for she had heard him.
e:roxana=serious

This was a two-story log house which had acquired the reputation a few years before of being haunted, and that was the end of its usefulness.


Nobody would live in it afterward, or go near it by night, and most people even gave it a wide berth in the daytime.


As it had no competition, it was called *the* haunted house.


It was getting crazy and ruinous, now, from long neglect. It stood three hundred yards beyond Pudd’nhead Wilson’s house, with nothing between but vacancy. It was the last house in the town at that end.


Tom followed Roxy into the room.


She had a pile of clean straw in the corner for a bed, some cheap but well-kept clothing was hanging on the wall, there was a tin lantern freckling the floor with little spots of light, and there were various soap-and-candle boxes scattered about, which served for chairs.


The two sat down. Roxy said—


“Now den, I’ll tell you straight off, en I’ll begin to k’leck de money later on; I ain’t in no hurry.”
s=roxana

“What does you reckon I’s gwine to tell you?”


“Well, you—you—oh, Roxy, don’t make it too hard for me!”
s=tom;e:tom=fearful

“Come right out and tell me you’ve found out somehow what a shape I’m in on account of dissipation and foolishness.”


“Disposition en foolishness! *No* sir, dat ain’t it.”
s=roxana;e:roxana=angry

“Dat jist ain’t nothin’ at all, ’longside o’ what *I* knows.”


Tom stared at her, and said—
s=none

“Why, Roxy, what do you mean?”
s=tom;e:tom=confused

She rose, and gloomed above him like a Fate.
s=none;e:roxana=serious

“I means dis—en it’s de Lord’s truth.”
s=roxana

“You ain’t no more kin to ole Marse Driscoll den I is!—*dat’s* what I means!” and her eyes flamed with triumph.
e:roxana=smirking

“What!”
s=tom;e:tom=surprised

“Yassir, en *dat* ain’t all!”
s=roxana;e:roxana=angry

“You’s a *nigger*!—*bawn* a nigger en a *slave*!—en you’s a nigger en a slave dis minute; en if I opens my mouf ole Marse Driscoll’ll sell you down de river befo’ you is two days older den what you is now!”


“It’s a thundering lie, you miserable old blatherskite!”
s=tom;e:tom=angry

“It ain’t no lie, nuther. It’s jes de truth, en nothin’ *but* de truth, so he’p me.”
s=roxana

“Yassir—you’s my *son*—”


“You devil!”
s=tom

“En dat po’ boy dat you’s be’n a-kickin’ en a-cuffin’ today is Percy Driscoll’s son en yo’ *marster*—”
s=roxana

“You beast!”
s=tom

“En *his* name’s Tom Driscoll, en *yo’* name’s Valet de Chambers, en you ain’t *got* no fambly name, beca’se niggers don’t *have* em!”
s=roxana

Tom sprang up and seized a billet of wood and raised it; but his mother only laughed at him, and said—
s=none;e:roxana=smirking

“Set down, you pup! Does you think you kin skyer me? It ain’t in you, nor de likes of you.”
s=roxana

“I reckon you’d shoot me in de back, maybe, if you got a chance, for dat’s jist yo’ style—*I* knows you, throo en throo—but I don’t mind gitt’n killed, beca’se all dis is down in writin’ en it’s in safe hands, too, en de man dat’s got it knows whah to look for de right man when I gits killed.”


“Oh, bless yo’ soul, if you puts yo’ mother up for as big a fool as *you* is, you’s pow’ful mistaken, I kin tell you!”
e:roxana=serious

“Now den, you set still en behave yo’self; en don’t you git up ag’in till I tell you!”
e:roxana=angry

Tom fretted and chafed awhile in a whirlwind of disorganizing sensations and emotions, and finally said, with something like settled conviction—
s=none;e:tom=serious

“The whole thing is moonshine; now then, go ahead and do your worst; I’m done with you.”
s=tom

Roxy made no answer. She took the lantern and started toward the door.
s=none;e:roxana=serious

Tom was in a cold panic in a moment.
e:tom=fearful

“Come back, come back!” he wailed.
s=tom

“I didn’t mean it, Roxy; I take it all back, and I’ll never say it again! Please come back, Roxy!”


The woman stood a moment, then she said gravely:
s=none;e:roxana=serious

“Dat’s one thing you’s got to stop, Valet de Chambers. You can’t call me *Roxy*, same as if you was my equal. Chillen don’t speak to dey mammies like dat.”
s=roxana

“You’ll call me ma or mammy, dat’s what you’ll call me—leastways when dey ain’t nobody aroun’.”
s=roxana;e:roxana=smirking

“*Say* it!”
s=roxana;e:roxana=serious

It cost Tom a struggle, but he got it out.
s=none

“Dat’s all right.”
s=roxana

“Don’t you ever forgit it ag’in, if you knows what’s good for you.”
s=roxana

“Now den, you has said you wouldn’t ever call it lies en moonshine ag’in.”


“I’ll tell you dis, for a warnin’: if you ever does say it ag’in, it’s de *las’* time you’ll ever say it to me; I’ll tramp as straight to de Judge as I kin walk, en tell him who you is, en *prove* it.”
e:roxana=angry

“Does you b’lieve me when I says dat?”


“Oh,” groaned Tom, “I more than believe it; I *know* it.”
s=tom;e:tom=unhappy

Roxy knew her conquest was complete.
s=none;e:roxana=smirking

She could have proved nothing to anybody, and her threat about the writings was a lie; but she knew the person she was dealing with, and had made both statements without any doubt as to the effect they would produce.


She went and sat down on her candle-box, and the pride and pomp of her victorious attitude made it a throne. She said—


“Now den, Chambers, we’s gwine to talk business, en dey ain’t gwine to be no mo’ foolishness.”
s=roxana

“In de fust place, you gits fifty dollahs a month; you’s gwine to han’ over half of it to yo’ ma. Plank it out!”


But Tom had only six dollars in the world. He gave her that, and promised to start fair on next month’s pension.
s=none

“Chambers, how much is you in debt?”
s=roxana

Tom shuddered, and said—
s=none;e:tom=fearful

“Nearly three hundred dollars.”
s=tom

“How is you gwine to pay it?”
s=roxana

Tom groaned out—“Oh, I don’t know; don’t ask me such awful questions.”
s=tom;e:tom=unhappy

But she stuck to her point until she wearied a confession out of him: he had been prowling about in disguise, stealing small valuables from private houses; in fact, he made a good deal of a raid on his fellow-villagers a fortnight before, when he was supposed to be in St. Louis; but he doubted if he had sent away enough stuff to realize the required amount, and was afraid to make a further venture in the present excited state of the town.
s=none

His mother approved of his conduct, and offered to help, but this frightened him.


He tremblingly ventured to say that if she would retire from the town he should feel better and safer, and could hold his head higher—and was going on to make an argument, but she interrupted and surprised him pleasantly by saying she was ready; it didn’t make any difference to her where she stayed, so that she got her share of the pension regularly.


She said she would not go far, and would call at the haunted house once a month for her money.


Then she said—


“I don’t hate you so much now, but I’ve hated you a many a year—and anybody would.”
s=roxana;e:roxana=serious

“Didn’t I change you off, en give you a good fambly en a good name, en made you a white gen’l’man en rich, wid store clothes on—en what did I git for it?”


“You despised me all de time, en was al’ays sayin’ mean hard things to me befo’ folks, en wouldn’t ever let me forgit I’s a nigger—en—en—”
e:roxana=crying

She fell to sobbing, and broke down.
s=none

Tom said—“But you know I didn’t know you were my mother; and besides—”
s=tom;e:tom=wary

“Well, nemmine ’bout dat, now; let it go.”
s=roxana

“I’s gwine to fo’git it.”


Then she added fiercely, “En don’t ever make me remember it ag’in, or you’ll be sorry, *I* tell you.”
e:roxana=angry

When they were parting, Tom said, in the most persuasive way he could command—
s=none;e:tom=neutral

“Ma, would you mind telling me who was my father?”
s=tom

He had supposed he was asking an embarrassing question. He was mistaken.
s=none

Roxy drew herself up with a proud toss of her head, and said—
e:roxana=happy

“Does I mine tellin’ you? No, dat I don’t! You ain’t got no ’casion to be shame’ o’ yo’ father, *I* kin tell you.”
s=roxana

“He wuz de highest quality in dis whole town—ole Virginny stock. Fust famblies, he wuz. Jes as good stock as de Driscolls en de Howards, de bes’ day dey ever seed.”
e:roxana=smirking

She put on a little prouder air, if possible, and added impressively:
s=none

“Does you ’member Cunnel Cecil Burleigh Essex, dat died de same year yo’ young Marse Tom Driscoll’s pappy died, en all de Masons en Odd Fellers en Churches turned out en give him de bigges’ funeral dis town ever seed?”
s=roxana

“Dat’s de man.”


Under the inspiration of her soaring complacency the departed graces of her earlier days returned to her, and her bearing took to itself a dignity and state that might have passed for queenly if her surroundings had been a little more in keeping with it.
s=none

“Dey ain’t another nigger in dis town dat’s as high-bawn as you is.”
s=roxana

“Now den, go ’long!”
e:roxana=neutral

“En jes you hold yo’ head up as high as you want to—you has de right, en dat I kin swah.”


## X. The Nymph Revealed
s=none

> All say, “How hard it is that we have to die”﻿—a strange complaint to come from the mouths of people who have had to live. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


> When angry, count four; when very angry, swear. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


Every now and then, after Tom went to bed, he had sudden wakings out of his sleep, and his first thought was, “Oh, joy, it was all a dream!”
t=tom;e:tom=happy

Then he laid himself heavily down again, with a groan and the muttered words, “A nigger! I am a nigger! Oh, I wish I was dead!”
t=none;e:tom=unhappy;s=tom

He woke at dawn with one more repetition of this horror, and then he resolved to meddle no more with that treacherous sleep.
s=none;e:tom=weary

He began to think. Sufficiently bitter thinkings they were. They wandered along something after this fashion:
e:tom=thinking

“Why were niggers *and* whites made? What crime did the uncreated first nigger commit that the curse of birth was decreed for him?”
t=tom

“And why is this awful difference made between white and black?﻿ ﻿… How hard the nigger’s fate seems, this morning!﻿—yet until last night such a thought never entered my head.”


He sighed and groaned an hour or more away.
t=none;e:tom=unhappy

Then “Chambers” came humbly in to say that breakfast was nearly ready.


“Tom” blushed scarlet to see this aristocratic white youth cringe to him, a nigger, and call him “Young Marster.”
e:tom=wary

He said roughly﻿—


“Get out of my sight!” and when the youth was gone, he muttered, “He has done me no harm, poor wretch, but he is an eyesore to me now, for he is Driscoll the young gentleman, and I am a﻿—oh, I wish I was dead!”
s=tom;e:tom=unhappy

A gigantic irruption, like that of Krakatoa a few years ago, with the accompanying earthquakes, tidal waves, and clouds of volcanic dust, changes the face of the surrounding landscape beyond recognition, bringing down the high lands, elevating the low, making fair lakes where deserts had been, and deserts where green prairies had smiled before.
s=none

The tremendous catastrophe which had befallen Tom had changed his moral landscape in much the same way.
e:tom=thinking

Some of his low places he found lifted to ideals, some of his ideals had sunk to the valleys, and lay there with the sackcloth and ashes of pumice-stone and sulphur on their ruined heads.
e:tom=unhappy

For days he wandered in lonely places, thinking, thinking, thinking﻿—trying to get his bearings. It was new work.
e:tom=thinking

If he met a friend, he found that the habit of a lifetime had in some mysterious way vanished﻿—his arm hung limp, instead of involuntarily extending the hand for a shake.


It was the “nigger” in him asserting its humility, and he blushed and was abashed.
e:tom=wary

And the “nigger” in him was surprised when the white friend put out his hand for a shake with him.
e:tom=surprised

He found the “nigger” in him involuntarily giving the road, on the sidewalk, to a white rowdy and loafer.
e:tom=wary

When Rowena, the dearest thing his heart knew, the idol of his secret worship, invited him in, the “nigger” in him made an embarrassed excuse and was afraid to enter and sit with the dread white folks on equal terms.
e:tom=fearful

The “nigger” in him went shrinking and skulking here and there and yonder, and fancying it saw suspicion and maybe detection in all faces, tones, and gestures.


So strange and uncharacteristic was Tom’s conduct that people noticed it, and turned to look after him when he passed on; and when he glanced back﻿—as he could not help doing, in spite of his best resistance﻿—and caught that puzzled expression in a person’s face, it gave him a sick feeling, and he took himself out of view as quickly as he could.


He presently came to have a hunted sense and a hunted look, and then he fled away to the hilltops and the solitudes.
e:tom=unhappy

He said to himself that the curse of Ham was upon him.


He dreaded his meals; the “nigger” in him was ashamed to sit at the white folks’ table, and feared discovery all the time; and once when Judge Driscoll said, “What’s the matter with you? You look as meek as a nigger,” he felt as secret murderers are said to feel when the accuser says, “Thou art the man!”
e:tom=fearful

Tom said he was not well, and left the table.
e:york=neutral

His ostensible “aunt’s” solicitudes and endearments were become a terror to him, and he avoided them.


And all the time, hatred of his ostensible “uncle” was steadily growing in his heart; for he said to himself, “He is white; and I am his chattel, his property, his goods, and he can sell me, just as he could his dog.”
e:tom=angry;t=tom

For as much as a week after this, Tom imagined that his character had undergone a pretty radical change.
t=none;e:tom=thinking

But that was because he did not know himself.


In several ways his opinions were totally changed, and would never go back to what they were before, but the main structure of his character was not changed, and could not be changed.


One or two very important features of it were altered, and in time effects would result from this, if opportunity offered﻿—effects of a quite serious nature, too.


Under the influence of a great mental and moral upheaval his character and habits had taken on the appearance of complete change, but after a while with the subsidence of the storm both began to settle toward their former places.


He dropped gradually back into his old frivolous and easygoing ways and conditions of feeling and manner of speech, and no familiar of his could have detected anything in him that differentiated him from the weak and careless Tom of other days.
e:tom=neutral

The theft-raid which he had made upon the village turned out better than he had ventured to hope.
e:tom=happy

It produced the sum necessary to pay his gaming-debts, and saved him from exposure to his uncle and another smashing of the will.


He and his mother learned to like each other fairly well.
e:roxana=happy

She couldn’t love him, as yet, because there “warn’t nothing *to* him,” as she expressed it, but her nature needed something or somebody to rule over, and he was better than nothing.
e:roxana=neutral

Her strong character and aggressive and commanding ways compelled Tom’s admiration in spite of the fact that he got more illustrations of them than he needed for his comfort.
e:tom=wary

However, as a rule her conversation was made up of racy tattle about the privacies of the chief families of the town (for she went harvesting among their kitchens every time she came to the village), and Tom enjoyed this.
e:tom=happy;e:roxana=happy

It was just in his line. She always collected her half of his pension punctually, and he was always at the haunted house to have a chat with her on these occasions.


Every now and then she paid him a visit there on between-days also.


Occasionally he would run up to St. Louis for a few weeks, and at last temptation caught him again.
e:tom=excited

He won a lot of money, but lost it, and with it a deal more besides, which he promised to raise as soon as possible.
e:tom=unhappy

For this purpose he projected a new raid on his town.
e:tom=thinking

He never meddled with any other town, for he was afraid to venture into houses whose ins and outs he did not know and the habits of whose households he was not acquainted with.


He arrived at the haunted house in disguise on the Wednesday before the advent of the twins﻿—after writing his aunt Pratt that he would not arrive until two days after﻿—and lay in hiding there with his mother until toward daylight Friday morning, when he went to his uncle’s house and entered by the back way with his own key, and slipped up to his room, where he could have the use of the mirror and toilet articles.
e:tom=wary

He had a suit of girl’s clothes with him in a bundle as a disguise for his raid, and was wearing a suit of his mother’s clothing, with black gloves and veil.


By dawn he was tricked out for his raid, but he caught a glimpse of Pudd’nhead Wilson through the window over the way, and knew that Pudd’nhead had caught a glimpse of him.
e:tom=surprised;e:wilson=surprised

So he entertained Wilson with some airs and graces and attitudes for a while, then stepped out of sight and resumed the other disguise, and by and by went down and out the back way and started down town to reconnoiter the scene of his intended labors.
e:tom=smirking;e:wilson=confused

But he was ill at ease.
e:tom=wary

He had changed back to Roxy’s dress, with the stoop of age added to the disguise, so that Wilson would not bother himself about a humble old woman leaving a neighbor’s house by the back way in the early morning, in case he was still spying.


But supposing Wilson had seen him leave, and had thought it suspicious, and had also followed him?
e:tom=fearful

The thought made Tom cold. He gave up the raid for the day, and hurried back to the haunted house by the obscurest route he knew.


His mother was gone; but she came back, by and by, with the news of the grand reception at Patsy Cooper’s, and soon persuaded him that the opportunity was like a special providence, it was so inviting and perfect.
e:roxana=excited

So he went raiding, after all, and made a nice success of it while everybody was gone to Patsy Cooper’s.
e:tom=happy

Success gave him nerve and even actual intrepidity; insomuch, indeed, that after he had conveyed his harvest to his mother in a back alley, he went to the reception himself, and added several of the valuables of that house to his takings.
e:tom=smirking

After this long digression we have now arrived once more at the point where Pudd’nhead Wilson, while waiting for the arrival of the twins on that same Friday evening, sat puzzling over the strange apparition of that morning﻿—a girl in young Tom Driscoll’s bedroom; fretting, and guessing, and puzzling over it, and wondering who the shameless creature might be.
e:wilson=thinking

## XI. Pudd’nhead’s Startling Discovery


> There are three infallible ways of pleasing an author, and the three form a rising scale of compliment: 1, to tell him you have read one of his books; 2, to tell him you have read all of his books; 3, to ask him to let you read the manuscript of his forthcoming book. No. 1 admits you to his respect; No. 2 admits you to his admiration; No. 3 carries you clear into his heart. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


> As to the Adjective: when in doubt, strike it out. —*Pudd’nhead Wilson’s Calendar*


The twins arrived presently, and talk began. It flowed along chattily and sociably, and under its influence the new friendship gathered ease and strength.
e:wilson=happy;e:luigi=happy;e:angelo=happy

Wilson got out his *Calendar*, by request, and read a passage or two from it, which the twins praised quite cordially.


This pleased the author so much that he complied gladly when they asked him to lend them a batch of the work to read at home.


In the course of their wide travels they had found out that there are three sure ways of pleasing an author; they were now working the best of the three.


There was an interruption, now.


Young Tom Driscoll appeared, and joined the party. He pretended to be seeing the distinguished strangers for the first time when they rose to shake hands; but this was only a blind, as he had already had a glimpse of them, at the reception, while robbing the house.
e:tom=smirking

The twins made mental note that he was smooth-faced and rather handsome, and smooth and undulatory in his movements—graceful, in fact.
e:luigi=thinking;e:angelo=neutral

Angelo thought he had a good eye; Luigi thought there was something veiled and sly about it.
e:luigi=wary

Angelo thought he had a pleasant free-and-easy way of talking; Luigi thought it was more so than was agreeable.


Angelo thought he was a sufficiently nice young man; Luigi reserved his decision.


Tom’s first contribution to the conversation was a question which he had put to Wilson a hundred times before.


It was always cheerily and good-naturedly put, and always inflicted a little pang, for it touched a secret sore; but this time the pang was sharp, since strangers were present.
e:wilson=wary

“Well, how does the law come on? Had a case yet?”
s=tom;e:tom=smirking

Wilson bit his lip, but answered, “No—not yet,” with as much indifference as he could assume.
s=wilson;e:wilson=serious

Judge Driscoll had generously left the law feature out of the Wilson biography which he had furnished to the twins.
s=none

Young Tom laughed pleasantly, and said:
e:tom=happy

“Wilson’s a lawyer, gentlemen, but he doesn’t practise now.”
s=tom

The sarcasm bit, but Wilson kept himself under control, and said without passion:
s=none;e:wilson=neutral

“I don’t practise, it is true. It is true that I have never had a case, and have had to earn a poor living for twenty years as an expert accountant in a town where I can’t get hold of a set of books to untangle as often as I should like.”
s=wilson

“But it is also true that I did fit myself well for the practice of the law. By the time I was your age, Tom, I had chosen a profession, and was soon competent to enter upon it.”
e:wilson=serious

Tom winced.
s=none;e:tom=unhappy

“I never got a chance to try my hand at it, and I may never get a chance; and yet if I ever do get it I shall be found ready, for I have kept up my law-studies all these years.”
s=wilson

“That’s it; that’s good grit! I like to see it. I’ve a notion to throw all my business your way. My business and your law-practice ought to make a pretty gay team, Dave,” and the young fellow laughed again.
s=tom;e:tom=smirking

“If you will throw—” Wilson had thought of the girl in Tom’s bedroom, and was going to say, “If you will throw the surreptitious and disreputable part of your business my way, it may amount to something;” but thought better of it and said, “However, this matter doesn’t fit well in a general conversation.”
s=wilson;e:wilson=thinking

“All right, we’ll change the subject; I guess you were about to give me another dig, anyway, so I’m willing to change. How’s the Awful Mystery flourishing these days?”
s=tom;e:tom=happy

“Wilson’s got a scheme for driving plain window-glass out of the market by decorating it with greasy fingermarks, and getting rich by selling it at famine prices to the crowned heads over in Europe to outfit their palaces with. Fetch it out, Dave.”
e:tom=smirking

Wilson brought three of his glass strips, and said—
s=none

“I get the subject to pass the fingers of his right hand through his hair, so as to get a little coating of the natural oil on them, and then press the balls of them on the glass.”
s=wilson;e:wilson=neutral

“A fine and delicate print of the lines in the skin results, and is permanent, if it doesn’t come in contact with something able to rub it off. You begin, Tom.”


“Why, I think you took my fingermarks once or twice before.”
s=tom;e:tom=neutral

“Yes; but you were a little boy the last time, only about twelve years old.”
s=wilson

“That’s so. Of course I’ve changed entirely since then, and variety is what the crowned heads want, I guess.”
s=tom;e:tom=smirking

He passed his fingers through his crop of short hair, and pressed them one at a time on the glass.
s=none

Angelo made a print of his fingers on another glass, and Luigi followed with the third.


Wilson marked the glasses with names and date, and put them away.


Tom gave one of his little laughs, and said—
e:tom=happy

“I thought I wouldn’t say anything, but if variety is what you are after, you have wasted a piece of glass. The hand-print of one twin is the same as the hand-print of the fellow-twin.”
s=tom;e:tom=smirking

“Well, it’s done now, and I like to have them both, anyway,” said Wilson, returning to his place.
s=wilson;e:wilson=neutral

“But look here, Dave,” said Tom, “you used to tell people’s fortunes, too, when you took their fingermarks. Dave’s just an all-round genius—a genius of the first water, gentlemen; a great scientist running to seed here in this village, a prophet with the kind of honor that prophets generally get at home—for here they don’t give shucks for his scientifics, and they call his skull a notion-factory—hey, Dave, ain’t it so?”
s=tom;e:tom=excited

“But never mind; he’ll make his mark some day—fingermark, you know, he-he! But really, you want to let him take a shy at your palms once; it’s worth twice the price of admission or your money’s returned at the door.”
e:tom=smirking

“Why, he’ll read your wrinkles as easy as a book, and not only tell you fifty or sixty things that’s going to happen to you, but fifty or sixty thousand that ain’t. Come, Dave, show the gentlemen what an inspired Jack-at-all-science we’ve got in this town, and don’t know it.”


Wilson winced under this nagging and not very courteous chaff, and the twins suffered with him and for him.
s=none;e:wilson=unhappy;e:luigi=unhappy;e:angelo=unhappy

They rightly judged, now, that the best way to relieve him would be to take the thing in earnest and treat it with respect, ignoring Tom’s rather overdone raillery; so Luigi said—


“We have seen something of palmistry in our wanderings, and know very well what astonishing things it can do. If it isn’t a science, and one of the greatest of them, too, I don’t know what its other name ought to be. In the Orient—”
s=luigi;e:luigi=serious

Tom looked surprised and incredulous. He said—
s=none;e:tom=surprised

“That juggling a science? But really, you ain’t serious, are you?”
s=tom

“Yes, entirely so. Four years ago we had our hands read out to us as if our palms had been covered with print.”
s=luigi;e:luigi=neutral

“Well, do you mean to say there was actually anything in it?” asked Tom, his incredulity beginning to weaken a little.
s=tom;e:tom=confused

“There was this much in it,” said Angelo: “what was told us of our characters was minutely exact—we could not have bettered it ourselves. Next, two or three memorable things that had happened to us were laid bare—things which no one present but ourselves could have known about.”
s=angelo;e:angelo=serious

“Why, it’s rank sorcery!” exclaimed Tom, who was now becoming very much interested.
s=tom;e:tom=excited

“And how did they make out with what was going to happen to you in the future?”


“On the whole, quite fairly,” said Luigi. “Two or three of the most striking things foretold have happened since; much the most striking one of all happened within that same year.”
s=luigi;e:luigi=neutral

“Some of the minor prophecies have come true; some of the minor and some of the major ones have not been fulfilled yet, and of course may never be: still, I should be more surprised if they failed to arrive than if they didn’t.”


Tom was entirely sobered, and profoundly impressed. He said, apologetically—
s=none;e:tom=serious

“Dave, I wasn’t meaning to belittle that science; I was only chaffing—chattering, I reckon I’d better say. I wish you would look at their palms. Come, won’t you?”
s=tom

“Why certainly, if you want me to; but you know I’ve had no chance to become an expert, and don’t claim to be one. When a past event is somewhat prominently recorded in the palm I can generally detect that, but minor ones often escape me—not always, of course, but often—but I haven’t much confidence in myself when it comes to reading the future.”
s=wilson;e:wilson=neutral

“I am talking as if palmistry was a daily study with me, but that is not so. I haven’t examined half a dozen hands in the last half dozen years; you see, the people got to joking about it, and I stopped to let the talk die down.”
e:wilson=thinking

“I’ll tell you what we’ll do, Count Luigi: I’ll make a try at your past, and if I have any success there—no, on the whole, I’ll let the future alone; that’s really the affair of an expert.”
e:wilson=

He took Luigi’s hand. Tom said—
s=none

“Wait—don’t look yet, Dave! Count Luigi, here’s paper and pencil. Set down that thing that you said was the most striking one that was foretold to you, and happened less than a year afterward, and give it to me so I can see if Dave finds it in your hand.”
s=tom;e:tom=excited

Luigi wrote a line privately, and folded up the piece of paper, and handed it to Tom, saying—
s=none;e:luigi=neutral

“I’ll tell you when to look at it, if he finds it.”
s=luigi

Wilson began to study Luigi’s palm, tracing life lines, heart lines, head lines, and so on, and noting carefully their relations with the cobweb of finer and more delicate marks and lines that enmeshed them on all sides; he felt of the fleshy cushion at the base of the thumb, and noted its shape; he felt of the fleshy side of the hand between the wrist and the base of the little finger, and noted its shape also; he painstakingly examined the fingers, observing their form, proportions, and natural manner of disposing themselves when in repose.
s=none;e:wilson=thinking

All this process was watched by the three spectators with absorbing interest, their heads bent together over Luigi’s palm, and nobody disturbing the stillness with a word.


Wilson now entered upon a close survey of the palm again, and his revelations began.


He mapped out Luigi’s character and disposition, his tastes, aversions, proclivities, ambitions, and eccentricities in a way which sometimes made Luigi wince and the others laugh, but both twins declared that the chart was artistically drawn and was correct.
e:luigi=wary

Next, Wilson took up Luigi’s history. He proceeded cautiously and with hesitation, now, moving his finger slowly along the great lines of the palm, and now and then halting it at a “star” or some such landmark, and examining that neighborhood minutely.
e:wilson=thinking

He proclaimed one or two past events, Luigi confirmed his correctness, and the search went on.


Presently Wilson glanced up suddenly with a surprised expression—
e:wilson=surprised

“Here is a record of an incident which you would perhaps not wish me to—”
s=wilson

“Bring it out,” said Luigi, good-naturedly; “I promise you it shan’t embarrass me.”
s=luigi;e:luigi=happy

But Wilson still hesitated, and did not seem quite to know what to do.
s=none;e:wilson=wary

Then he said—


“I think it is too delicate a matter to—to—I believe I would rather write it or whisper it to you, and let you decide for yourself whether you want it talked out or not.”
s=wilson

“That will answer,” said Luigi; “write it.”
s=luigi;e:luigi=neutral

Wilson wrote something on a slip of paper and handed it to Luigi, who read it to himself and said to Tom—
s=none;e:wilson=neutral

“Unfold your slip and read it, Mr. Driscoll.”
s=luigi

Tom read:
s=none

> “It was prophesied that I would kill a man. It came true before the year was out.”
e:tom=serious

Tom added, “Great Scott!”
s=tom;e:tom=surprised

Luigi handed Wilson’s paper to Tom, and said—
s=none;e:luigi=neutral

“Now read this one.”
s=luigi

Tom read:
s=none

> “You have killed someone, but whether man, woman or child, I do not make out.”


“Caesar’s ghost!” commented Tom, with astonishment.
s=tom

“It beats anything that was ever heard of! Why, a man’s own hand is his deadliest enemy! Just think of that—a man’s own hand keeps a record of the deepest and fatalest secrets of his life, and is treacherously ready to expose him to any black-magic stranger that comes along.”
e:tom=fearful

“But what do you let a person look at your hand for, with that awful thing printed on it?”


“Oh,” said Luigi, reposefully, “I don’t mind it. I killed the man for good reasons, and I don’t regret it.”
s=luigi;e:luigi=neutral

“What were the reasons?”
s=tom;e:tom=confused

“Well, he needed killing.”
s=luigi

“I’ll tell you why he did it, since he won’t say himself,” said Angelo, warmly.
s=angelo;e:angelo=happy

“He did it to save my life, that’s what he did it for. So it was a noble act, and not a thing to be hid in the dark.”


“So it was, so it was,” said Wilson; “to do such a thing to save a brother’s life is a great and fine action.”
s=wilson;e:wilson=happy

“Now come,” said Luigi, “it is very pleasant to hear you say these things, but for unselfishness, or heroism, or magnanimity, the circumstances won’t stand scrutiny. You overlook one detail; suppose I hadn’t saved Angelo’s life, what would have become of mine? If I had let the man kill him, wouldn’t he have killed me, too? I saved my own life, you see.”
s=luigi;e:luigi=neutral

“Yes, that is your way of talking,” said Angelo, “but I know you—I don’t believe you thought of yourself at all.”
s=angelo;e:angelo=serious

“I keep that weapon yet that Luigi killed the man with, and I’ll show it to you sometime. That incident makes it interesting, and it had a history before it came into Luigi’s hands which adds to its interest.”
e:angelo=excited

“It was given to Luigi by a great Indian prince, the Gaikowar of Baroda, and it had been in his family two or three centuries. It killed a good many disagreeable people who troubled that hearthstone at one time and another. It isn’t much too look at, except that it isn’t shaped like other knives, or dirks, or whatever it may be called—here, I’ll draw it for you.”


He took a sheet of paper and made a rapid sketch.
s=none

“There it is—a broad and murderous blade, with edges like a razor for sharpness. The devices engraved on it are the ciphers or names of its long line of possessors—I had Luigi’s name added in Roman letters myself with our coat of arms, as you see.”
s=angelo;e:angelo=thinking

“You notice what a curious handle the thing has. It is solid ivory, polished like a mirror, and is four or five inches long—round, and as thick as a large man’s wrist, with the end squared off flat, for your thumb to rest on; for you grasp it, with your thumb resting on the blunt end—so—and lift it aloft and strike downward.”
e:angelo=smirking

“The Gaikowar showed us how the thing was done when he gave it to Luigi, and before that night was ended Luigi had used the knife, and the Gaikowar was a man short by reason of it. The sheath is magnificently ornamented with gems of great value. You will find the sheath more worth looking at than the knife itself, of course.”


Tom said to himself—
s=none;t=tom;e:tom=unhappy

“It’s lucky I came here. I would have sold that knife for a song; I supposed the jewels were glass.”


“But go on; don’t stop,” said Wilson. “Our curiosity is up now, to hear about the homicide. Tell us about that.”
s=wilson;t=none;e:wilson=excited

“Well, briefly, the knife was to blame for that, all around. A native servant slipped into our room in the palace in the night, to kill us and steal the knife on account of the fortune incrusted on its sheath, without a doubt.”
s=angelo;e:angelo=serious

“Luigi had it under his pillow; we were in bed together. There was a dim night-light burning. I was asleep, but Luigi was awake, and he thought he detected a vague form nearing the bed.”
e:angelo=thinking

“He slipped the knife out of the sheath and was ready, and unembarrassed by hampering bedclothes, for the weather was hot and we hadn’t any.”


“Suddenly that native rose at the bedside, and bent over me with his right hand lifted and a dirk in it aimed at my throat; but Luigi grabbed his wrist, pulled him downward, and drove his own knife into the man’s neck. That is the whole story.”
e:angelo=smirking

Wilson and Tom drew deep breaths, and after some general chat about the tragedy, Pudd’nhead said, taking Tom’s hand—
s=none;e:wilson=neutral

“Now, Tom, I’ve never had a look at your palms, as it happens; perhaps you’ve got some little questionable privacies that need—hel‑lo!”
s=wilson;e:wilson=surprised

Tom had snatched away his hand, and was looking a good deal confused.
s=none;e:tom=fearful

“Why, he’s blushing!” said Luigi.
s=luigi;e:luigi=smirking

Tom darted an ugly look at him, and said sharply—
s=none;e:tom=angry

“Well, if I am, it ain’t because I’m a murderer!”
s=tom

Luigi’s dark face flushed, but before he could speak or move, Tom added with anxious haste: “Oh, I beg a thousand pardons. I didn’t mean that; it was out before I thought, and I’m very, very sorry—you must forgive me!”
s=tom;e:luigi=angry;e:tom=wary

Wilson came to the rescue, and smoothed things down as well as he could; and in fact was entirely successful as far as the twins were concerned, for they felt sorrier for the affront put upon him by his guest’s outburst of ill manners than for the insult offered to Luigi.
s=none;e:wilson=neutral;e:luigi=neutral;e:angelo=neutral

But the success was not so pronounced with the offender.


Tom tried to seem at his ease, and he went through the motions fairly well, but at bottom he felt resentful toward all the three witnesses of his exhibition; in fact, he felt so annoyed at them for having witnessed it and noticed it that he almost forgot to feel annoyed at himself for placing it before them.
e:tom=scowling

However, something presently happened which made him almost comfortable, and brought him nearly back to a state of charity and friendliness.
e:tom=happy

This was a little spat between the twins; not much of a spat, but still a spat; and before they got far with it they were in a decided condition of irritation with each other.
e:luigi=angry;e:angelo=angry

Tom was charmed; so pleased, indeed, that he cautiously did what he could to increase the irritation while pretending to be actuated by more respectable motives.


By his help the fire got warmed up to the blazing-point, and he might have had the happiness of seeing the flames show up, in another moment, but for the interruption of a knock on the door—an interruption which fretted him as much as it gratified Wilson.
e:tom=unhappy;e:wilson=happy

Wilson opened the door.


The visitor was a good-natured, ignorant, energetic, middle-aged Irishman named John Buckstone, who was a great politician in a small way, and always took a large share in public matters of every sort.
n:buckstone=John Buckstone;e:buckstone=happy

One of the town’s chief excitements, just now, was over the matter of rum.


There was a strong rum party and a strong anti-rum party.


Buckstone was training with the rum party, and he had been sent to hunt up the twins and invite them to attend a mass-meeting of that faction.


He delivered his errand, and said the clans were already gathering in the big hall over the market-house.


Luigi accepted the invitation cordially, Angelo less cordially, since he disliked crowds, and did not drink the powerful intoxicants of America.
e:luigi=happy;e:angelo=weary

In fact, he was even a teetotaler sometimes—when it was judicious to be one.


The twins left with Buckstone, and Tom Driscoll joined company with them uninvited.
e:tom=neutral

In the distance one could see a long wavering line of torches drifting down the main street, and could hear the throbbing of the bass drum, the clash of cymbals, the squeaking of a fife or two, and the faint roar of remote hurrahs.


The tail-end of this procession was climbing the market-house stairs when the twins arrived in its neighborhood; when they reached the hall it was full of people, torches, smoke, noise and enthusiasm.


They were conducted to the platform by Buckstone—Tom Driscoll still following—and were delivered to the chairman in the midst of a prodigious explosion of welcome.
n:chairman=The Chairman;e:chairman=happy

When the noise had moderated a little, the chair proposed that “our illustrious guests be at once elected, by complimentary acclamation, to membership in our ever-glorious organization, the paradise of the free and the perdition of the slave.”
s=chairman

This eloquent discharge opened the floodgates of enthusiasm again, and the election was carried with thundering unanimity.
s=none

Then arose a storm of cries:


“Wet them down! Wet them down! Give them a drink!”


Glasses of whisky were handed to the twins. Luigi waved his aloft, then brought it to his lips; but Angelo set his down.
s=none;e:luigi=happy

There was another storm of cries:
e:angelo=serious

“What’s the matter with the other one?”


“What is the blond one going back on us for?” “Explain! Explain!”


The chairman inquired, and then reported—
s=none

“We have made an unfortunate mistake, gentlemen. I find that the Count Angelo Capello is opposed to our creed—is a teetotaler, in fact, and was not intending to apply for membership with us. He desires that we reconsider the vote by which he was elected. What is the pleasure of the house?”
s=chairman;e:chairman=serious

There was a general burst of laughter, plentifully accented with whistlings and catcalls, but the energetic use of the gavel presently restored something like order.
s=none

Then a man spoke from the crowd, and said that while he was very sorry that the mistake had been made, it would not be possible to rectify it at the present meeting. According to the bylaws it must go over to the next regular meeting for action.


He would not offer a motion, as none was required.


He desired to apologize to the gentleman in the name of the house, and begged to assure him that as far as it might lie in the power of the Sons of Liberty, his temporary membership in the order would be made pleasant to him.


This speech was received with great applause, mixed with cries of—
s=none

“That’s the talk!”


“He’s a good fellow, anyway, if he *is* a teetotaler!” “Drink his health!” “Give him a rouser, and no heeltaps!”


Glasses were handed around, and everybody on the platform drank Angelo’s health, while the house bellowed forth in song:
s=none

> For he’s a jolly good fel‑low,


> For he’s a jolly good fel‑low,


> For he’s a jolly good fe‑el‑low—


> Which nobody can deny.


Tom Driscoll drank. It was his second glass, for he had drunk Angelo’s the moment that Angelo had set it down.
e:tom=excited

The two drinks made him very merry—almost idiotically so—and he began to take a most lively and prominent part in the proceedings, particularly in the music and catcalls and side-remarks.


The chairman was still standing at the front, the twins at his side.


The extraordinarily close resemblance of the brothers to each other suggested a witticism to Tom Driscoll, and just as the chairman began a speech he skipped forward and said with an air of tipsy confidence to the audience—
e:tom=smirking

“Boys, I move that he keeps still and lets this human philopena snip you out a speech.”
s=tom

The descriptive aptness of the phrase caught the house, and a mighty burst of laughter followed.
s=none

Luigi’s southern blood leaped to the boiling-point in a moment under the sharp humiliation of this insult delivered in the presence of four hundred strangers. It was not in the young man’s nature to let the matter pass, or to delay the squaring of the account.
e:luigi=angry

He took a couple of strides and halted behind the unsuspecting joker.


Then he drew back and delivered a kick of such titanic vigor that it lifted Tom clear over the footlights and landed him on the heads of the front row of the Sons of Liberty.
e:tom=surprised

Even a sober person does not like to have a human being emptied on him when he is not doing any harm; a person who is not sober cannot endure such an attention at all.


The nest of Sons of Liberty that Driscoll landed in had not a sober bird in it; in fact there was probably not an entirely sober one in the auditorium.


Driscoll was promptly and indignantly flung on to the heads of Sons in the next row, and these Sons passed him on toward the rear, and then immediately began to pummel the front-row Sons who had passed him to them.


This course was strictly followed by bench after bench as Driscoll traveled in his tumultuous and airy flight toward the door; so he left behind him an ever lengthening wake of raging and plunging and fighting and swearing humanity.


Down went group after group of torches, and presently above the deafening clatter of the gavel, roar of angry voices, and crash of succumbing benches, rose the paralyzing cry of “**Fire!**”


The fighting ceased instantly; the cursing ceased; for one distinctly defined moment there was a dead hush, a motionless calm, where the tempest had been; then with one impulse the multitude awoke to life and energy again, and went surging and struggling and swaying, this way and that, its outer edges melting away through windows and doors and gradually lessening the pressure and relieving the mass.


The fire-boys were never on hand so suddenly before; for there was no distance to go, this time, their quarters being in the rear end of the market-house.


There was an engine company and a hook-and-ladder company. Half of each was composed of rummies and the other half of anti-rummies, after the moral and political share-and-share-alike fashion of the frontier town of the period.


Enough anti-rummies were loafing in quarters to man the engine and the ladders.


In two minutes they had their red shirts and helmets on—they never stirred officially in unofficial costume—and as the mass meeting overhead smashed through the long row of windows and poured out upon the roof of the arcade, the deliverers were ready for them with a powerful stream of water which washed some of them off the roof and nearly drowned the rest.


But water was preferable to fire, and still the stampede from the windows continued, and still the pitiless drenching assailed it until the building was empty; then the fire-boys mounted to the hall and flooded it with water enough to annihilate forty times as much fire as there was there; for a village fire-company does not often get a chance to show off, and so when it does get a chance it makes the most of it.


Such citizens of that village as were of a thoughtful and judicious temperament did not insure against fire; they insured against the fire-company.


